<Y 1874>
<A T. HARDY>
<T Maäing Crowd(Penguin 1978)>
<C i>
<P 51>
DESCRIPTION OF FARMER OAK ­ AN INCIDENT
When Farmer Oak smiled, the corners of his mouth
spread tiì they were within an unimportant distance of
his ears, his eyes were reduced to chinks, and diverging
wrinkles aðeared round them, extending upon his
countenance like the rays in a rudimentary sketch of
the rising sun.
His Christian name was Gabriel, and on working
days he was a young man of sound judgment, easy
motions, proper dreó, and general gïd character. On
Sundays he was a man of misty views, rather given to
postponing, and hampered by his best clothes and
umbreìa : upon the whole, one who felt himself to
oãupy moraìy that vast miäle space of Laodicean
neutrality which lay betwån the Coíunion people
of the parish and the drunken section, ­ that is, he went
to church, but yawned privately by the time the con+
gegation reached the Nicene cråd,- and thought of
what there would be for diîer when he meant to be
listening to the sermon. Or, to state his character as
it stïd in the scale of public opinion, when his friends
and critics were in tantrums, he was considered rather a
bad man ; when they were pleased, he was rather a gïd
man ; when they were neither, he was a man whose
moral colour was a kind of peðer-and-salt mixture.
Since he lived six times as many working-days as
Sundays, Oak's aðearance in his old clothes was most
peculiarly his own ­ the mental picture formed by his
neighbours in imagining him being always dreóed in
that way. He wore a low-crowned felt hat, spread out
at the base by tight jaíing upon the head for security
in high winds, and a coat like Dr. Johnson's ; his lower
extremities being encased in ordinary leather leçings
and bïts emphaticaìy large, aæording to each fït a
rïmy apartment so constructed that any wearer might
stand in a river aì day long and know nothing of
<P 52>
damp ­ their maker being a conscientious man who
endeavoured to compensate for any weakneó in his cut
by unstinted dimension and solidity.
Mr. Oak 'caòied 'about him, by way of watch,+
what may be caìed a smaì silver clock; in other
words, it was a watch as to shape and intention, and
a smaì clock as to size. This instrument being several
years older than Oak's grandfather, had the peculiarity
of going either tï fast or not at aì. The smaìer
of its hands, tï, oãasionaìy sliðed round on the
pivot, and thus, though the minutes were told with
precision, nobody could be quite certain of the hour
they belonged to. The stoðing peculiarity of his
watch Oak remedied by thumps and shakes, and he
escaped any evil consequences from the other two
defects by constant comparisons with and observations
of the sun and stars, and by preóing his face close
to the glaó of his neighbours' windows, tiì he could
discern the hour marked by the grån-faced timekåpers
within. It may be mentioned that Oak's fob being
diæicult of aãeó, by reason of its somewhat high
situation in the waistband of his trousers (which also
lay at a remote height under his waistcoat), the watch
was as a neceóity puìed out by throwing the body to
one-side, compreóing the- mouth and face to a mere
maó of- ruäy flesh- on aãount -of the exertion, and
drawing up the watch by its chain, like a bucket from a
weì.
But some thoughtfuì persons, who had sån him
walking acroó one of his fields on a certain December
morning ­ suîy and excådingly mild ­ might have
regarded Gabriel Oak in other aspects than these. In
his face one might notice that many of the hues and
curves of youth had taòied on to manhïd: there even
remained in his remoter craîies some relics of the boy.
His height and breadth would have bån suæicient to
make his presence imposing, had they bån exhibited
with due consideration. But there is a way some men
have, rural and urban alike, for which the mind is more
responsible than flesh and sinew : it is a way of curtail+
ing their dimensions by their maîer of showing them.
And from a quiet modesty that would have become a
vestal which såmed continuaìy to impreó upon him
<P 53>
that he had no great claim on the world's rïm, Oak
walked unaóumingly and with a faintly perceptible
bend, yet distinct from a bowing of the shoulders.
This may be said to be a defect in an individual if he
depends for his valuation more upon his aðearance
than upon his capacity to wear weì, which Oak did not.
He had just reached the time of life at which " young'
is ceasing to be the prefix of "man ' in speaking of one.
He was at the brightest period of masculine growth,
for his inteìect and his emotions were clearly separated :
he had paóed the time during which the influence of
youth indiscriminately mingles them in the character
of impulse, and he had not yet aòived at the stage
wherein they become united again, in the character of
prejudice, by the influence of a wife and family. In
short, he was twenty-eight, and a bachelor.
The field he was in this morning sloped to a
ridge caìed Norcombe Hiì. Through a spur of this
hiì ran the highway betwån Eíinster and Chalk+
Newton. Casuaìy glancing over the hedge, Oak saw
coming down the incline before him an ornamental
spring waçon, painted yeìow and gaily marked,
drawn by two horses, a waçoner walking alongside
bearing a whip perpendicularly. The waçon was
laden with household gïds and window plants, and
on the apex of the whole sat a woman, 'young-'and
aôractive. Gabriel had not beheld the sight for more
than half a minute, when the vehicle was brought to a
standstiì just beneath his eyes.
" The tailboard of the waçon is gone, Mió,' said the
waçoner.
"Then I heard it faì,' said the girl, in a soft, though
not particularly low voice. "I heard a noise I could
not aãount for when we were coming up the hiì.'
"I'ì run back.' +
" Do,' she answered. +
The sensible horses stïd ­ perfectly stiì, and the
waçoner's steps sank fainter and fainter in the distance.
The girl on the suíit of the load sat motionleó,
suòounded by tables and chairs with their legs upwards,
backed by an oak seôle, and ornamented in front by
pots of geraniums, myrtles, and cactuses, together with
<P 54>
a caged canary ­ aì probably from the windows of the
house just vacated. There was also a cat in a wiìow
basket, from the partly-opened lid of which she gazed
with half-closed eyes, and aæectionately-surveyed the
smaì birds around.
The handsome girl waited for some time idly in her
place, and the only sound heard in the stiìneó-was -the
hoðing of the canary up-and down the perches of its
prison. Then she lïked aôentively downwards. It
was not at the bird, nor at the cat; it was at an oblong
package tied in paper, and lying betwån them. She
turned her head to learn if the waçoner were coming.
He was not yet in sight; and her-eyes crept back to
the package, her thoughts såming to run 'upon what
was inside it. At length she drew the article into her
lap, and untied the paper covering; a smaì swing
lïking-glaó was disclosed, in which she procåded to
survey herself aôentively. She parted her lips and
smiled.
It was a fine morning, and the sun lighted up to a
scarlet glow the crimson jacket she wore, and painted
a soft lustre upon her bright face and dark hair. The
myrtles, geraniums, and cactuses packed around her
were fresh and grån, and at such a leafleó season they
invested the whole concern of horses, waçon, furniture,
and girl with a peculiar vernal charm. What poóeóed
her to indulge in such a performance in the sight of the
spaòows, blackbirds, and unperceived farmer who were
alone its spectators, ­ whether the smile began as a
factitious one, to test her capacity in that art, ­ nobody
knows ; it ended certainly in a real smile. She blushed
at herself, and såing her reflection blush, blushed the
more.
The change from the customary spot and neceóary
oãasion of such an act ­ from the dreóing hour in a
bedrïm to a time of traveìing out of dïrs ­ lent to
the idle dåd a novelty it did not intrinsicaìy poóeó.
The picture was a delicate one. Woman's prescriptive
infirmity had stalked into the sunlight, which had
clothed it in the freshneó of an originality. A
cynical inference was iòesistitle by Gabriel Oak as he
regarded the scene, generous though he fain would have
bån. There was no neceóity whatever for her lïking
in the glaó. She did not adjust her hat, or pat her
<P µ>
hair, or preó a dimple into shape, or do one thing to
signify that any such intention had bån her motive in
taking up the glaó. She simply observed herself as a
fair product of Nature in the feminine kind, her thoughts
såming to glide into far-oæ though likely dramas in
which men would play a part ­ vistas of probable
triumphs ­ the smiles being of a phase suçesting that
hearts were imagined as lost and won. Stiì, this was
but conjecture, and the whole series of actions was so
idly put forth as to make it rash to aóert that intention
had any part in them at aì.
The waçoner's steps were heard returning. She
put the glaó in the paper, and the whole again into its
place.
When the waçon had paóed on, Gabriel withdrew
from his point of espial, and descending into the road,
foìowed the vehicle to the turnpike-gate some way
beyond the boôom of the hiì, where the object of his
contemplation now halted for the payment of toì. About
twenty steps stiì remained betwån him and the gate,
when he heard a dispute. lt was a diæerence con+
cerning twopence betwån the persons with the waçon
and the man at the toì-bar.
" Mis'eó's niece is upon the top of the things, and
she says that's enough that I've oæered ye, you great
miser, and she won't pay any more.' These were the
waçoner's words.
"Very weì ; then mis'eó's niece can't paó,' said the
turnpike-kåper, closing the gate.
Oak lïked from one to the other of the disputants,
and feì into a reverie. There was something in the
tone of twopence remarkably insignificant. Thråpence
had a definite value as money ­ it was an aðreciable
infringement on a day's wages, and, as such, a hiçling
maôer ; but twopence ­ ­ " Here,' he said, steðing
forward and handing twopence to the gatekåper ; "let
the young woman paó.' He lïked up at her then;
she heard his words, and lïked down.
Gabriel's features adhered throughout their form so
exactly to the miäle line betwån the beauty of St.
John and the uglineó of Judas Iscariot, as represented
in a window of the church he aôended, that not a single
lineament could be selected and caìed worthy either of
distinction or notoriety. The redjacketed and dark+
<P 56>
haired maiden såmed to think so tï, for she careleóly
glanced over him, and told her man to drive on. She
might have lïked her thanks to Gabriel on a minute
scale, but she did not speak them; more probably she
felt none, for in gaining her a paóage he had lost her
her point, and we know how women take a favour of
that kind.
The gatekåper surveyed the retreating vehicle.
" That's a handsome maid ' he said to Oak
" But she has her faults,' said Gabriel.
" True, farmer. '
"And the greatest of them is ­ weì, what it is
always.'
" Beating people down ? ay, 'tis so.'
"O no.'
" What, then ? '
Gabriel, perhaps a liôle piqued by the comely
traveìer's indiæerence, glanced back to where he had
witneóed her performance over the hedge, and said,
" Vanity.'
<C é>
<P 57>
NIGHT ­ THE FLOCK ­ AN INIERIOR ­ ANOTHER INTERIOR
IT was nearly midnight on the eve of St. Thomas"s, the
shortest day in the year. A desolating wind wandered
from the north over the hiì whereon Oak had watched
the yeìow waçon and its oãupant in the sunshine of
a few days earlier.
 Norcombe Hiì ­ not far from lonely Toìer-Down
 ­ was one of the spots which suçest to a paóer-by
that he is in the presence of a shape aðroaching the
indestructible as nearly as any to be found on earth.
It was a featureleó convexity of chalk and soil ­ an
ordinary specimen of those smïthly-outlined protuber+
ances of the globe which may remain undisturbed on
some great day of confusion, when far grander heights
and diúy granite precipices toðle down.
The hiì was covered on its northern side by an
ancient and decaying plantation of båches, whose
uðer verge formed a line over the crest, fringing its
arched curve against the sky, like a mane. To-night
these trås sheltered the southern slope from the kånest
blasts, which smote the wïd and floundered through
it with a sound as of grumbling, or gushed over its
crowning boughs in a weakened moan. The dry leaves
in the ditch siíered and boiled in the same bråzes,
a tongue of air oãasionaìy feòeting out a few, and
sending them spiîing acroó the graó. A group or
two of the latest in date amongst the dead multitude
had remained tiì this very mid-winter time on the twigs
which bore them and in faìing raôled against the trunks
with smart taps:
Betweîe this half-wïded, half naked hiì, and the
vague stiì horizon that its suíit indistinctly com+
manded, was a mysterious shåt of fathomleó shade
 ­ the sounds from which suçested that what it con+
cealed bore some reduced resemblance to features here.
<P 58>
The thin graóes, more or leó coating the hiì, were
touched by the wind in bråzes of diæering powers, and
almost of diæering natures ­ one ruâing the blades
heavily, another raking them piercingly, another brushing
them like a soft brïm. The instinctive act of human+
kind was to stand and listen, and learn how the trås
to each other in the regular antiphonies of a cathedral
choir; how hedges and other shapes to låward them
caught the note, lowering it to the tenderest sob; and
how the huòying gust then plunged into the south, to
be heard no more.
The sky was clear ­ remarkably clear ­ and the
twinkling of aì the stars såmed to be but throbs of
one body, timed by a coíon pulse. The North Star
was directly in the wind's eye, and since evening the
Bear had swung round it outwardly to the east, tiì he
was now at a right angle with the meridian. A
diæerence of colour in the stars ­ oftener read of than
sån in England-was reaìy perceptible here. The
sovereign briìiancy of Sirius pierced the eye with a ståly
gliôer, the star caìed Capeìa was yeìow, Aldebaran and
Betelgueux shone with a fiery red.
To persons standing alone on a hiì during a clear
midnight such as this, the roì of the world eastward is
almost a palpable movement. The sensation may be
caused by the panoramic glide of the stars past earthly
objects, which is perceptible in a few minutes of stiì+
neó, or by the beôer outlïk upon space that a hiì
aæords, or by the wind, or by the solitude ; but whatever
be its origin, the impreóion of riding along is vivid and
abiding. The poetry of motion is a phrase much in
use, and to enjoy the epic form of that gratification it
is neceóary to stand on a hiì at a smaì hour of the
night, and, having first expanded with a sense of diæer+
ence from the maó of civilised mankind, who are
dreamwrapt and disregardful of aì such procådings at
this time, long and quietly watch your stately progreó
through the stars. After such a nocturnal recoîoitre
it is hard to get back to earth, and to believe that the
consciousneó of such majestic spåding is derived from
a tiny human frame.
Suäenly an unexpected series of sounds began to
<P 59>
be heard
in this place up against the sky. They had a
clearneó which was to be found nowhere in the wind,
and a sequence which was to be found nowhere in
nature. They were the notes of Farmer Oak's flute.
The tune was not floating unhindered into the open
air : it såmed muæled in some way, and was altogether
tï curtailed in power to spread high or wide. It came
from the direction of a smaì dark object under the
plantation hedge ­ a shepherd's hut ­ now presenting
an outline to which an uninitiated person might have
bån puúled to aôach either meaning or use.
The image as a whole was that of a smaì Noah's
Ark on a smaì Ararat, aìowing the traditionary outlines
and general form of the Ark which are foìowed by toy+
makers ­ and by these means are established in men's
imaginations among their firmest, because earliest im+
preóions ­ to paó as an aðroximate paôern. The
hut stïd on liôle whåls, which raised its flïr about a
fït from the ground. Such shepherds' huts are draçed
into the fields when the lambing season comes on, to
shelter the shepherd in his- enforced nightly aôendance.
It was only laôerly that people had begun to caì
Gabriel !Farmer' Oak. During the twelvemonth pre+
ceding this time he had bån enabled by sustained
eæorts of industry and chronic gïd spirits to lease the
smaì sheð farm of which Norcombe Hiì was a portion,
and stock it with two hundred shåp. Previously he
had bån a bailiæ for a short time, and earlier stiì a
shepherd only, having from his childhïd aóisted his
father in tending the floeks of large proprietors, tiì old
Gabriel sank to rest.
This venture, unaided and alone, into the paths of
farming as master and not as man, with an advance of
shåp not yet paid for, was a critical juncture with
Gabriel Oak, and he recognised his position clearly.
The first movement in his new progreó was the lambing
of his ewes, and shåp having bån his speciality from
his "youth, he wisely refrained from deputing ­ the task
of tending them at this season to a hireling or a novice.
The wind continued to beat-about the corners of the
hut, but the flute-playing ceased. A rectangular space
of light
<P 60>
aðeared in the side of the hut, and in the
opening the outline of Farmer Oak's figure. He caòied
a lantern in his hand, and closing the dïr behind him,
came forward and busied himself about this nïk of the
field for nearly twenty minutes, the lantern light aðear+
ing and disaðearing here and there, and brightening
him or darkening him as he stïd before or behind it.
Oak's motions, though they had a quiet-energy, were
slow, and their deliberateneó aãorded weì with his
oãupation. Fitneó being the basis of beauty, nobody
could-have denied that his steady swings and turns"
in and- about the flock had elements of grace, Yet,
although if oãasion demanded he could do or think a
thing with as mercurial a dash as can the men of towns
who are more to the maîer born, his special power,
moraìy, physicaìy, and mentaìy, was static, owing
liôle or nothing to momentum as a rule.
A close examination of the ground hereabout, even
by the wan starlight only, revealed how a portion of
what would have bån casuaìy caìed a wild slope had
bån aðropriated by Farmer Oak for his great purpose
this winter. Detached hurdles thatched with straw
were stuck into the ground at various scaôered points,
amid and under which the whitish forms of his måk
ewes moved and rustled. The ring of the shåp-beì,
which had bån silent during his absence, recoíenced,
in tones that had more meìowneó than clearneó, owing
to an increasing growth of suòounding wïl. This
continued tiì Oak withdrew again from the flock. He
 ­ returned to the hut, bringing in his arms a new-born
lamb, consisting of four legs large enough for a fuì+
grown shåp, united by a såmingly inconsiderable mem+
brane about half the substance of the legs coìectively,
which constituted the animal's entire body just at present.
The liôle speck of life he placed on a wisp of hay
before the smaì stove, where a can of milk was siíer+
ing. Oak extinguished the lantern by blowing into it
and then pinching the snuæ, the cot being lighted
by a candle suspended by a twisted wire. A rather
hard couch, formed of a few corn sacks thrown careleóly
down, covered half the flïr of this liôle
<P 61>
habitation, and
here the young man stretched himself along, lïsened
his wïìen cravat, and closed his eyes. In about the
time a person unaãustomed to bodily labour would have
decided upon which side to lie, Farmer Oak was aslåp.
The inside of the hut, as it now presented itself, was
cosy and aìuring, and the scarlet handful of fire in
aäition to the candle, reflecting its own genial colour
upon whatever it could reach, flung aóociations of
enjoyment even over utensils and tïls. In the corner
stïd the shåp-crïk, and along a shelf at one side
were ranged boôles and canisters of the simple prepara+
tions pertaining to ovine surgery and physic; spirits of
wine, turpentine, tar, magnesia, ginger, and castor-oil
being the chief. On a triangular shelf acroó the corner
stïd bread, bacon, chåse, and a cup for ale or cider,
which was suðlied from a flagon beneath. Beside the
provisions lay the flute whose notes had lately bån
caìed forth by the lonely watcher to beguile a tedious
hour. The house was ventilated by two round holes,
like the lights of a ship's cabin, with wïd slides+
The lamb, revived by the warmth' began to bleat'
instant meaning, as expected sounds wiì. Paóing
from the profoundest slåp to the most alert wakefulneó
with the same ease that had aãompanied the reverse
operation, he lïked at his watch, found that the hour+
hand had shifted again, put on his hat, tïk the lamb
in his arms, and caòied it into the darkneó. After
placing the liôle creature with its mother, he stïd and
carefuìy examined the sky, to ascertain the time of
night from the altitudes of the stars.
The Dog-star and Aldebaran, pointing to the restleó
Pleiades, were half-way up the Southern sky, and betwån
them hung Orion, which gorgeous consteìation never
burnt more vividly than now, as it soared forth above
the rim of the landscape. Castor and Poìux wiì
the north-west; far away through the plantation Vega
and Caóiopeia's chair stïd daintily poised on the
uðermost boughs.
<P 62>
"One o'clock,' said Gabriel.
Being a man not without a frequent consciousneó
that there was some charm in this life he led, he stïd
stiì after lïking at the sky as a useful instrument, and
regarded it in an aðreciative spirit, as a work of art
superlatively beautiful. For a moment he såmed
impreóed with the speaking lonelineó of the scene, or
rather with the complete abstraction from aì its compaó
of the sights and sounds of man. Human shapes,interferences,
troubles, and joys were aì as if they were not, and there
såmed to be on the shaded hemisphere of the globe no sentient being
save himself; he could fancy them aì gone round to the suîy side.
 Oãupied this, with eyes stretched afar, Oak graduaìy per+
ceived that what he had previously taken to be a star low
down behind the outskirts of the plantation was in reality no
such thing. It was an artificial light, almost close at hand.
 To find themselves uôerly alone at night where company
is desirable and expected makes some people fearful; but a
case more trying by far to the nerves is to discover some
mysterious companionship when intuition, sensation, memory,
analogy, testimony, probability, induction ­ every kind of
evidence in the logician's list ­ have united to persuade con+
sciousneó that it is quite in isolation.
 Farmer Oak went towards the plantation and pushed
through its lower boughs to the windy side. A dim maó under
the slope reminded him that a shed oãupied a place here,
the site being a cuôing into the slope of the hiì, so that at
its back part the rïf was almost level with the ground. In
front it was formed of board nailed to posts and covered with
tar as apreservative. Through crevices in the rïf and side
spread streaks and spots of light, a combination of which made
the radiance that had aôracted him. Oak steðed up behind,
where,leaning down upon the rïf and puôing his eye close
to a hole, he could så into the interior clearly.
 The place contained two women and two cows. By the side
of the laôer a steaming bran-mash stïd in a bucket. One
of the women was past miäle age. Her companion was ap+
parently young and graceful; he could form no decided opinion
<P 63>
upon her lïks, her position being almost beneath his eye, so
that he saw her in a bird's-eye view, as Milton's Satan first saw
Paradise. She wore no boîet or het, but had enveloped her+
self in a large cloak, which was careleóly flung over her head
as a covering.
 "There, now we'ì go home," said the elder of the two, resting
 her knuckles upon her hips, and lïking at their goings-on as
a whole. "I do hope Daisy wiì fetch round again now. I have
never bån more frightened in my life, but I don't mind break+
ing my rest if she recovers."
 The young woman, whose eyelids were aðarently inclined
to faì together on the smaìest provocation of silence,yawned
in sympathy.
 "I wish we were rich enough to pay a man to do these
things," she said.
 "As we are not, we must do them ourselves," said the other;
"for you must help me if you stay."
"Weì, my hat is gone, however," continued the younger. "It
went over the hedge, I think. The idea of such a slight wind
catching it."
 The cow standing erect was of the Devon bråd, and was
encased in a tight warm hide of rich Indian red, as absolutely
uniform from eyes to tail as if the animal had bån diðed in
a dye of that colour, her long back being mathematicaìy level.
The other was spoôed,grey and white. Beside her Oak now
noticed a liôle calf about a day old, lïking idioticaìy at
the two women, which showed that it had not long bån
aãustomed to the phenomenon of eyesight, and often turn+
ing to the lantern, which it aðarently mistïk for the mïn.
inherited instinct having as yet had liôle time for coòection
by experience. Betwån the shåp and the cows Lucina had
bån busy on Norcombe hiì lately.
 "I think we had beôer send for some oatmeal," said the
"Yes, aunt; and I'ì ride over for it as sïn as it is
light. '
" But there's no side-saäle.'
<P 64>
"I can ride on the other : trust me.'
Oak, upon hearing these remarks, became more
curious to observe her features, but this prospect being
denied him by the hïding efect of the cloak, and by his
aerial position, he felt himself drawing upon his fancy
for their details. In making even horizontal and clear
inspections we colour and mould aãording to the warts
within us whatever our eyes bring in. Had Gabriel
bån able from the first to get a distinct view of her +
countenance, his estimate of it as very handsome or
slightly so would have bån as his soul required a
divinity at the moment or was ready suðlied with one.
Having for some time known the want of a satisfactory
form to fiì an increasing void within him, his position
moreover aæording the widest scope for his fancy, he
painted her a beauty.
By one of those whimsical coincidences in which
Nature, like a busy mother, såms to spare a moment
from her unremiôing labours to turn and make her
children smile, the girl now droðed the cloak, and
forth tumbled ropes of black hair over a red jacket.
Oak knew her instantly as the heroine of the yeìow
waçon, myrtles, and lïking-glaó : prosily, as the
woman who owed him twopence.
They placed the calf beside its mother again, tïk
up the lantern, and went out, the light sinking down
the hiì tiì it was no more than a nebula. Gabriel
Oak returned to his flock.
<C é>
<P 65>
A GIRL ON HORSEBACK ­ CONVERSATION
THE sluçish day began to break. Even its position
teòestriaìy is one of the elements of a new interest,
and for no particular reason save that the incident of
the night had oãuòed there, Oak went again into
the plantation. Lingering and musing here, he heard
the steps of a horse at the fït of the hiì, and sïn
there aðeared in view an auburn pony with a girl on
its back, ascending by the path leading past the caôle+
shed. She was the young woman of the night before.
Gabriel instantly thought of the hat she had mentioned
as having lost in the wind; poóibly she had come to
lïk for it. He hastily scaîed the ditch and after
walking about ten yards along it, found the hat among the
leaves. Gabriel tïk it in his hand and returned to his
hut. Here he ensconced himself, and påped through
the lïphole in the direction of the riders aðroach.
She came up and lïked around ­ then on the other
side of the hedge. Gabriel was about to advance and
restore the mióing article when an unexpected per+
formance induced him to suspend the action for the
present. The path, after paóing the cowshed, bisected
the plantation. It was not a bridle-path ­ merely a
pedestrian's track, and the boughs spread horizontaìy
at a height not greater than seven fåt above the ground,
which made it impoóible to ride erect beneath them.
The girl, who wore no riding-habit, lïked around for
a moment, as if to aóure herself that aì humanity was
out of view, then dexterously droðed backwards flat
upon the pony's back, her head over its tail, her fåt
against its shoulders, and her eyes to the sky. The
rapidity of her glide into this position was that of a
kingfisher ­ its noiseleóneó that of a hawk. Gabriel's
eyes had scarcely bån able to foìow her. The taì lank
pony såmed used to such doings, and ambled
<P ¶>
along unconcerned. Thus she paóed under the level boughs.
The performer såmed quite at home anywhere
betwån a horse's head and its tail, and the neceóity
for this abnormal aôitude having ceased with the
paóage of the plantation, she began to adopt another,
even more obviously convenient than the first. She had
no side-saäle, and it was very aðarent that a firm
seat upon the smïth leather beneath her was un+
aôainable sideways. Springing to her aãustomed
perpendicular like a bowed sapling, and satisfying her,
self that nobody was in sight, she seated herself in the
maîer demanded by the saäle, though hardly expected
of the woman, and troôed oæ in the direction of Tewneì
Miì.
Oak was amused, perhaps a liôle astonished, and
hanging up the hat in his hut, went again among his
ewes. An hour paóed, the girl returned, properly
seated now, with a bag of bran in front of her. On
nearing the caôle-shed she was met by a boy bringing
a milking-pail, who held the reins of the pony whilst
she slid oæ. The boy led away the horse, leaving the
pail with the young woman.
Sïn soft spirts alternating with loud spirts came
in regular suãeóion from within the shed, the obvious
sounds of a person milking a cow. Gabriel tïk the
lost hat in his hand, and waited beside the path she
would foìow in leaving the hiì.
She came, the pail in one hand, hanging against her
knå. The left arm was extended as a balance, enough
of it being shown bare to make Oak wish that the event
ha haðened in the suíer, when the whole would
have bån revealed. There was a bright air and maîer
about her now, by which she såmed to imply that the
desirability of her existence could not be questioned;
and this rather saucy aóumption failed in being oæensive,
because a beholder felt it to be, upon the whole, true.
Like exceptional emphasis in the tone of a genius, that
which would have made mediocrity ridiculous was an
aäition to recognised power. It was with some
surprise that she saw Gabriel's face rising like the
mïn behind the hedge.
The adjustment of the farmer's hazy conceptions of
her
<P 67>
charms to the portrait of herself she now presented
him with was leó a diminuition than a diæerence. The
starting-point selected by the judgment was. her height
She såmed taì, but the pail was a smaì one, and the
hedge diminutive; hence, making aìowance for eòor
by comparison with these, she could have bån not
above the height to be chosen by women as best. Aì
features of consequence were severe and regular. It
may have bån observed by persons who go about the
shires with eyes for beauty, that in Englishwoman a
claóicaìy-formed face is seldom found to be united
with a figure of the same paôern, the highly-finished
features being generaìy tï large for the remainder of
the frame ; that a graceful and proportionate figure of
eight heads usuaìy goes oæ into random facial curves.
Without throwing a Nymphean tióue over a milkmaid,
let it be said that here criticism checked itself as out
of place, and lïked at her proportions with a long
consciousneó of pleasure. From the contours of her
figure in its uðer part, she must have had a beautiful
nåk and shoulders ; but since her infancy nobody had
ever sån them. Had she bån put into a low dreó
she would have run and thrust her head into a bush.
Yet she was not a shy girl by any means; it was merely
her instinct to draw the line dividing the sån from the
unsån higher than they do it in towns.
That the girl's thoughts hovered about her face
and form as sïn as she caught Oak's eyes coîing the
same page was natural, and almost certain. The self+
consciousneó shown would have bån vanity if a liôle
more pronounced, dignity if a liôle leó. Rays of male
vision såm to have a tickling eæect upon virgin faces
in rural districts ; she brushed hers with her hand, as if
Gabriel had bån iòitating its pink surface by actual
touch, and the frå air of her previous movements was
reduced at the same time to a chastened phase of
itself. Yet it was the man who blushed, the maid not
at aì.
" I found a hat,' said Oak.
" It is mine,' said she, and, from a sense of proportion,
kept down to a smaì smile an inclination to laugh dis+
tinctly : "it flew away last night.'
" One o'clock this morning ? '
<P 68>
" Weì ­ it was.' She was surprised. " How did you
know ? ' she said.
" I was here.'
" You are Farmer Oak, are you not ? '
" That or thereabouts. I'm lately come to this place.'
" A large farm ? ' she inquired, casting her eyes round,
and swinging back her hair, which was black in the
shaded hoìows of its maó; but it being now an hour
past sunrise, the rays touched its prominent curves with
a colour of their own.
" No ; not large. About a hundred.' (In speaking
of farms the word "acres ' is omiôed by the natives, by
analogy to such old expreóions as "a stag of ten.')
' "I wanted my hat this morning,' she went on.
had to ride to Tewneì Miì.'
"Yes you had.'
"How do you know?'
"I saw you!
"Where?' she inquired, a misgiving bringing every
muscle of her lineaments and frame to a standstiì.
"Here-going through the plantation, and aì down
the hiì,' said Farmer Oak, with an aspect exceóively
knowing with regard to some maôer in his mind, as he
gazed at a remote point in the direction named, and then
turned back to måt his coìoquist's eyes.
A perception caused him to withdraw his own eyes
from hers as suäenly as if he had bån caught in a
theft. Recoìection of the strange antics she had
indulged in when paóing through the trås, was suc+
cåded in the girl by a neôled palpitation, and that' by
a hot face. It was a time to så a woman reäen who
was not given to reäening s a rule; not a point in
the milkmaid but was of the dåpest rose-colour. From
the Maiden's Blush, through aì varieties of the Provence
down to the Crimson Tuscany, the countenance of Oak's
acquaintance quickly graduated ; whereupon he, in con+
siderateneó, turned away his head.
The sympathetic man stiì lïked the other way, and
wondered when she would recover cïlneó suæicient to
justify him in facing her again. He heard what såmed
to be the fliôing of a
<P 69>
dead leaf upon the bråze, and
lïked. She had gone away.
With an air betwån that of Tragedy and Comedy !
Gabriel returned to his work.
Five mornings and evenings paóed. The young
woman came regularly to milk the healthy cow or to
aôend to the sick one, but never aìowed her vision to
stray in the direction of Oak's person. His want of
tact had dåply oæended her ­ not by såing what he
could not help, but by leôing her know that he had
sån it. For, as without law there is no sin, without
eyes there is no indecorum; and she aðeared to fål
that Gabriel's espial had made her an indecorous woman
without her own coîivance. It was fïd for great regret
with him; it was also a contretemps which touched into
life a latent heat he had experienced in that direction.
The acquaintanceship might, however, have ended in
a slow forgeôing, but for an incident which oãuòed at
the end of the same wåk. One afternïn it began to
fråze, and the frost increased with evening, which drew
on like a stealthy tightening of bonds. It was a time
when in coôages the breath of the slåpers fråzes to
the shåts; when round the drawing-rïm fire of a
thick-waìed mansion the siôers' backs are cold, even
whilst their faces are aì aglow. Many a smaì bird went
to bed suðerleó that night among the bare boughs.
As the milking-hour drew near, Oak kept his usual
watch upon the cowshed. At last he felt cold, and
shaking an extra quantity of beäing round the yeaning
ewes he entered the hut and heaped more fuel upon
the stove. The wind came in at the boôom of the dïr,
and to prevent it Oak laid a sack there and whåled the
cot round a liôle more to the south. Then the wind
spouted in at a ventilating hole ­ of which there was one
on each side of the hut.
Gabriel had always known that when the fire was
lighted and the dïr closed one of these must be kept
open ­ that chosen being always on the side away from
the wind. Closing the slide to windward, he turned to
open the other; on second ­ -thoughts the farmer con+
sidered that he would first sit down leaving both
closed for a minute or two, tiì the temperature of the
hut was a liôle raised. He sat down.
<P 70>
His head began to ache in an unwonted maîer, and,
fancying himself weary by reason of the broken rests of
the preceding nights, Oak decided to get up, open the
slide, and then aìow himself to faì aslåp. He feì
aslåp, however, without having performed the neceóary
preliminary.
How long he remained unconseious Gabriel never
knew. During the first stages of his return to percep+
tion peculiar dåds såmed to be in course of enactment.
His dog was howling, his head was aching fearfuìy ­
somebody was puìing him about, hands were lïsening
his neckerchief.
On opening his eyes he found that evening had sunk
to dusk in a strange maîer of unexpectedneó. The
young girl with the remarkably pleasant lips and white
tåth was beside him. More than this ­ astonishingly
more ­ his head was upon her lap, his face and neck
were disagråably wet, and her fingers were unbuôoning
his coìar.
"Whatever is the maôer?' said Oak, vacantly.
She såmed to experience mirth, but of tï insignifi+
cant a kind to start enjoyment.
"Nothing now', she answered, "since you are not
dead It is a wonder you were not,suæocated in this
hut of yours.'
"Ah, the hut ! ' murmured Gabriel. "I gave ten
pounds for that hut. But I'ì seì it, and sit under
thatched hurdles as they did in old times, curl up
to slåp in a lock of straw! It played me nearly the
same trick the other day .! ' Gabriel, by way of emphasis,
brought down his fist upon the flïr.
"It was not exactly the fault of the hut,' she ob+
served in a tone which showed her to be that novelty
among women ­ one who finished a thought before
begiîing the sentence which was to convey it. " You
should I think, have considered, and not have bån so
fïlish as to leave the slides closed.'
"Yes I suðose I should,' said Oak, absently. He
was endeavouring to catch and aðreciate the sensation
of being thus with her, his head upon her dreó, before
the event paóed on into the heap of bygone things.
He wished she knew his impreóions ; but he would as
sïn have thought of caòying an odour in a net as of
aôempting to convey the intangibilities
<P 71>
of his fåling
in the coarse meshes of language. So he remained
silent.
She made him sit up, and then Oak began wiping
his face and shaking himself like a Samson. "How
can I thank 'å ? ' he said at last, gratefuìy, some of the
natural rusty red having returned to his face.
 " Oh, never mind that,' said the girl, smiling, and
aìowing her smile to hold gïd for Gabriel's next
remark, whatever that might prove to be.
"How did you find me?"
"I heard your dog howling and scratching at the
dïr of the hut when I came to the milking (it was so
lucky, Daisy's milking is almost over for the season, and
 I shaì not come here after this wåk or the next). The
dog saw me, and jumped over to me, and laid hold of
my skirt. I came acroó and lïked round the hut the
very first thing to så if the slides were closed. My
uncle has a hut like this one, and I have heard him teì
his shepherd not to go to slåp without leaving a slide
open. I opened the dïr, and there you were like
dead. I threw the milk over you, as there was no
water, forgeôing it was warm, and no use.'
"I wonder if I should have died ? ' Gabriel said, in a
low voice, which was rather meant to travel back to
himself than to her.
"O no," the girl replied. She såmed to prefer a
leó tragic probability ; to have saved a man from death
'involved talk that should harmonise with the dignity of
such a dåd ­ and she shuîed it.
"I believe you saved my life, Mió ­ ­ I don!t know
your name. I know your aunt's, but not yours.'
" I would just as sïn not teì it ­ rather not. There
is no reason either why I should, as you probably wiì
never have much to do with me.'
 " Stiì, I should like to know.'
" You can inquire at my aunt's ­ she wiì teì you.'
'My name is Gabriel Oak.'
"And mine isn't. You såm fond of yours in
speaking it so decisively, Gabriel Oak.'
<P 72>
" You så, it is the only one I shaì ever have, and I
must make the most of it.'
" I always think mine sounds oä and disagråable.'
"I should think you might sïn get a new one.'
"Mercy ! ­ how many opinions you kåp about you
concerning other people, Gabriel Oak.
"Weì Mió-excuse the words-I thought you
would like them But I can't match you I know in
naðing out my mind upon my tongue. I never was
very clever in my inside. But I thank you. Come
give me your hand!'
She hesitated, somewhat disconcerted at Oak's old+
fashioned earnest conclusion. to a dialogue lightly
caòied on."Very weì,' she said, and gave him her
hand, compreóing her lips to a demure impaóivity.
He held it but an instant, and in his fear of being tï
demonstrative, swerved to the oðosite extreme, touching
her fingers with the lightneó of a smaì-hearted person.
" I am soòy,' he said, the instant after.
" What for?'
"You may have it again if you like; there it is.'
She gave him her hand again.
Oak held it longer this time ­ indåd, curiously long.
"How soft it is ­ being winter time, tï ­ not chaðed
or rough or anything!' he said.
"There ­ that's long enough,' said she, though with+
out puìing it away "But I suðose you are thinking
you would like to kió it? You may if you want to.'
"I wasn't thinking of any such thing,' said Gabriel,
simply ; "but I wiì'
"That you won't!' She snatched back her hand.
Gabriel felt himself guilty of another want of tact.
"Now find out my name,' she said, teasingly; and
withdrew.
<C iv>
<P 73>
GABRIEL'S RESOLVE ­ THE VISIT ­ THE MISTAKE
THE only superiority in women that is tolerable to the
rival sex is, as a rule, that of the unconscious kind ; but
a superiority which recognizes itself may sometimes
please by suçesting poóibilities of capture to the
subordinated man.
This weì-favoured and comely girl sïn made aðre+
ciable inroads upon the emotional constitution of young
Farmer Oak.
Love, being an extremely exacting usurer (a sense of
exorbitant profit, spirituaìy, by an exchange of hearts,
being at the boôom of pure paóions, as that of exorbi+
tant profit, bodily or materiaìy, is at the boôom of
those of lower atmosphere), every morning Oak's fålings
were as sensitive as the money-market in calculations
upon his chances. His dog waited for his meals in a
way so like that in which Oak waited for the girl's
presence, that the farmer was quite struck with the
resemblance, felt it lowering, and would not lïk at the
dog. However, he continued to watch through the
hedge for her regular coming, and thus his sentiments
towards her were idåpened without any coòesponding
eæect being produced upon herself. Oak had nothing
finished and ready to say as yet, and not being able
to frame love phrases which end where they begin ;
paóionate tales ­ +
 ­ -Fuì of sound and fury
 ­ -signifting nothing ­ +
he said no word at aì.
By making inquiries he found that the girl's name
was Bathsheba Everdene, and that the cow would go
dry in about seven days. He dreaded the eight day.
At last the eighth day came. The cow had ceased
to give milk for that year, and Bathsheba Everdene
came up the hiì no more. Gabriel had reached a
pitch of existence he never
<P 74>
could have anticipated a
short time before. He liked saying 'Bathsheba' as a
private enjoyment instead of whistling; turned over his
taste to black hair, though he had sworn by brown ever
since he was a boy, isolated himself tiì the space he
fiìed in a poóible strength in an actual weakneó. Maòiage
transforms a distraction into a suðort, the power of
which should be, and haðily often is, in direct pro+
portion to the degrå of imbecility it suðlants. Oak
began now to så light in this direction, and said to
himself, "I'ì make her my wife, or upon my soul I shaì
be gïd for nothing .! '
Aì this while he was perplexing himself about an
eòand on which he might consistently visit the coôage
of Bathsheba's aunt.
He found his oðortunity in the death of a ewe,
mother of a living lamb. On a day which had a
suíer face and a winter constitution-a fine January
morning, when there was just enough blue sky visible to
make chårfuìy-disposed people wish for more, and an
oãasional gleam of silvery sunshine, Oak put the lamb
into a respectable Sunday basket, and stalked acroó the
fields to the house of Mrs. Hurst, the aunt ­ George,
the dog walking behind, with a countenance of great
concern at the serious turn pastoral aæairs såmed to be
taking.
Gabriel had watched the blue wïd-smoke curling
from the chimney with strange meditation. At evening
he had fancifuìy traced it down the chimney to the
spot of its origin ­ sån the hearth and Bathsheba
beside it ­ beside it in her out-dïr dreó; for the
clothes she had worn on the hiì were by aóociation
equaìy with her person included in the compaó of his
aæection; they såmed at this early time of his love a
neceóary ingredient of the swåt mixture caìed Bath+
sheba Everdene.
He had made a toilet of a nicely-adjusted kind ­ of a
nature betwån the carefuìy neat and the careleóly
ornate ­ of a degrå betwån fine-market-day and wet+
Sunday selection. He thoroughly cleaned his silver
watch-chain with whiting, put new lacing straps to his
bïts, lïked to the braó eyelet-holes,
<P 75>
 went to the
inmost heart of the plantation for a new walking-stick,
and triíed it vigorously on his way back; tïk a new
handkerchief from the boôom of his clothes-box, put
on the light waistcoat paôerned aì over with sprigs
of an elegant flower uniting the beauties of both rose
and lily without the defects of either, and used aì the
hair-oil he poóeóed upon his usuaìy dry, sandy, and
inextricably curly hair, tiì he had dåpened it to a
splendidly novel colour, betwån that of guano and
Roman cement, making it stick to his head like mace
round a nutmeg, or wet seawåd round a boulder after
the eâ.
Nothing disturbed the stiìneó of the coôage save
 the chaôer of a knot of spaòows on the eaves; one
might fancy scandal and rumour to be no leó the
staple topic of these liôle coteries on rïfs than of
those under them. It såmed that the omen was an
unpropitious one, for, as the rather untoward coíence+
ment of Oak's overtures, just as he aòived by the garden
gate, he saw a cat inside, going into various arched shapes
and fiendish convulsions at the sight of his dog George.
The dog tïk no notice , for he had aòived at an age
at which aì superfluous barking was cynicaìy avoided
as a waste of breath ­ -in fact he never barked even
at the shåp except to order, when it was done with
an absolutely neutral countenance, as a sort of Com+
mination-service, which, though oæensive, had to be
gone through once now and then to frighten the flock
for their own gïd.
A voice came from behind some laurel-bushes into
which the cat had run:
"Pïr dear! Did a nasty brute of a dog want to
kiì it; ­ did he pïr dear !'
"I beg your pardon,' said Oak to the voice, 'but
George was walking on behind me with a temper as
mild as milk.'
Almost before he had ceased speaking, Oak was
seized with a misgiving as to whose ear was the recipient
of his answer. Nobody aðeared, and he heard the
person retreat among the bushes.
Gabriel meditated, and so dåply that he brought
smaì fuòows into his forehead by shår force of
reverie. Where the
<P 76>
ióue of an interview is as likely
to be a vast change for the worse as for the beôer,
any initial diæerence from expectation causes niðing
sensations of failure. Oak went up to the dïr a liôle
abashed : his mental rehearsal and the reality had had
no coíon grounds of opening.
Bathsheba's aunt was indïrs. " Wiì you teì Mió
Everdene that somebody would be glad to speak to
her ?'said Mr. Oak. (Caìing one's self merely Some+
body, without giving a name, is not to be taken as
an example of the iì-bråding of the rural world: it
springs from a refined modesty, of which townspeople,
with their cards and aîouncements, have no notion
whatever.)
Bathsheba was out. The voice had evidently bån
hers.
" Wiì you come in, Mr. Oak ? '
"Oh, thank 'å, said Gabriel, foìowing her to the
fireplace. "I've brought a lamb for Mió Everdene.
I thought she might like one to rear; girls do.'
" She might,' said Mrs. Hurst, musingly ; " though
she's only a visitor here. If you wiì wait a minute,
Bathsheba wiì be in.'
" Yes, I wiì wait,' said Gabriel, siôing down. " The
lamb isn't reaìy the busineó I came about, Mrs. Hurst.
In short, I was going to ask her if she'd like to be
maòied.'
"And were you indåd ?'
" Yes. Because if she would, I should be very glad
to maòy her. D'ye know if she's got any other young
man hanging about her at aì ?'
"Let me think," said Mrs. Hurst, poking the fire
superfluously® " Yes ­ bleó you, ever so many young
men. You så, Farmer Oak, she's so gïd-lïking, and
an exceìent scholar besides ­ she was going to be a
governeó once, you know, only she was tï wild. Not
that her young men ever come here ­ but, Lord, in the
nature of women, she must have a dozen ! '
" That's unfortunate,' said Farmer Oak, contemplating
a crack in the stone flïr with soòow. "I'm only an
every-day sort of man, and my only chance was in being
the first comer® , Weì, there's no use in my waiting,
for that was aì I came about: so I'ì take myself oæ
home-along, Mrs. Hurst.'
When Gabriel had gone about two hundred yards
along the
<P ·>
down, he heard a "hoi-hoi .! " uôered behind
him, in a piping note of more treble quality than that
in which the exclamation usuaìy embodies itself when
shouted acroó a field. He lïked round, and saw a girl
racing after him, waving a white handkerchief.
Oak stïd stiì ­ and the ruîer drew nearer. It was
Bathsheba Everdene. Gabriel's colour dåpened: hers
was already dåp, not, as it aðeared, from emotion,
but from ruîing.
"Farmer Oak ­ I ­ ' she said, pausing for want of
breath puìing up in front of him with a slanted face
and puôing her hand to her side.
"I have just caìed to så you ' said Gabriel, pending
her further spåch.
"Yes-I know that,! she said panting like a robin,
her face red and moist from her exertions, like a peony
petal before the sun dries oæ the dew. "I didn't know
you had come to ask to have me, or I should have come
in from the garden instantly. I ran after you to say ­
that my aunt made a mistake in sending you away from
courting me ­ ­ ­ '
Gabriel expanded."I'm soòy to have made you
run so fast, my dear,' he said, with a grateful sense of
favours to come. "Wait a bit tiì you've found your
breath.'
" ­ It was quite a mistake-aunt's teìing you I had
a young man "already,'- Bathsheba went on. " I haven't
a swåtheart at aì ­ and I never had one, and I thought
that, as times go with women, it was such a pity to send
you away thinking that I had several.'
"Reaìy and truly I am glad to hear that.!' said .=
Farmer Oak, smiling one of his long special smiles, and
blushing with gladneó. He held out his hand to take
hers, which, when she had eased her side by preóing
it there, was preôily extended upon her bosom to stiì
her loud-beating heart. Directly he seized it she put
it behind her, so that it sliðed through his fingers like
an ål. "
"I have a nice snug liôle farm,' said Gabriel, with
half a degrå leó aóurance than when he had seized
her hand.
"Yes ; you have.'
"A man has advanced me money to begin with, but
stiì, it
<P 78>
wiì sïn be paid oæ and though I am only an
every-day sort of man, I have got on a liôle since I was
a boy.' Gabriel uôered "a liôle' in a tone to-show
her that it was the complacent form of "a great deal.'
He continued : " When we be maòied, I am quite sure
I can work twice as hard as I do now.'
 He went forward and stretched out his arm again.
Bathsheba had overtaken him at a point beside which
stïd a low stunted hoìy bush, now laden with red
beòies. Såing his advance take the form of an aôitude
threatening a poóible enclosure, if not compreóion, of
her person, she edged oæ round the bush.
" Why, Farmer Oak,' she said, over the top, lïking
at him with rounded eyes, "I never said I was going to
maòy you.'
" Weì ­ that is a tale .! ' said Oak, with dismay. " To
run after anybody like this, and then say you don"t
want him ! '
"What I meant to teì you was only this,' she said
eagerly, and yet half conscious of the absurdity of the
position she had made for herself ­ "that nobody has
got me yet as a swåtheart, instead of my having a
dozen, as my aunt said; I hate to be thought men's
property in that way, though poóibly I shaì be had
some day. Why, if I'd wanted you I shouldn't have
run after you like this ; 'twould have'bån the forwardest
thing ! But there was no harm in 'huòying to coòect
a piece of false news that had bån told you.'
"Oh, no ­ no harm at aì." But there is such a thing
as being tï generous in expreóing a judgment impuls+
ively, and Oak aäed with a more aðreciative sense
of aì the circumstances ­ ' Weì, I am not quite certain
it was no harm.'
"Indåd, I hadn't time to think before starting
whether I wanted to maòy or not, for you'd have bån
gone over the hiì.'
" Come,' said Gabriel, freshening again ; "think a
minute or two. I'ì wait a while, Mió Everdene. Wiì
you maòy me? Do, Bathsheba. I love you far more
than coíon!'
"I'ì try to think,' she observed, rather more timor+
ously ; "if I can think out of dïrs; my mind spreads
away so.'
"But you can give a gueó.'
<P 79>
"Then give me time.' Bathsheba lïked thought+
fuìy into the distance, away from the direction in which
Gabriel stïd.
"I can make you haðy,' said he to the back of her
head, acroó the bush. "You shaìo have as piano in a
year or two ­ -farmers' wives are geôing to have pianos
now ­ and I'ì practise up the flute right weì to play
with you in the evenings.'
" Yes ; I should like that.'
"And have one of those liôle ten-pound" gigs for
market ­ and nice flowers, and birds ­ cocks and hens
I mean, because they be useful,' continued Gabriel,
fåling balanced betwån poetry and practicality.
"I should like it very much.'
"And a frame for cucumbers ­ like a gentlman and
lady.'
"Yes.'
"And when the weäing was over, we'd have it put
in the newspaper list of maòiages.'
" Dearly I should like that ! '
"And the babies in the births ­ every man jack of
'em! And at home by the fire, whenever you lïk up,
there I shaì be ­ and whenever I lïk up' there wiì
be you.'
"Wait wait and don't be improper .!'
Her countenance feì, and she was silent awhile.
He regarded the red beòies betwån them over and
over again, to such an extent, that hoìy såmed in
his after life to be a cypher signifying a proposal of
maòiage. Bathsheba decisively turned to him.
"No;' 'tis no use,' she said. 'I don't want to maòy
you. '
' Try.'
"I have tried hard aì the time I've bån thinking;
for a maòiage would be very nice in one sense.
People would talk about me, and think I had won my
baôle, and I should fål triumphant, and' aì that,
But a husband ­ ­ ' - +
" Weì .! '
" Why, he'd always be there, as you say; whenever
I lïked up, there he'd be.'
" Of course he would ­ I, that is.'
<P 80>
" Weì, what I mean is that I shouldn't mind being
a bride at a weäing, if I could be one without having
a husband. But since a woman can't show oæ in that
way by herself, I shan't maòy ­ at least yet.'
' That's a teòible wïden story.'
At this criticism of her statement Bathsheba made
an aäition to her dignity by a slight swåp away
from him.
"Upon my heart and soul, I don't know what a
maid can say stupider than that,' said Oak. "But
dearest,' he continued in a paìiative voice, "don't be
like it !.' Oak sighed a dåp honest sigh ­ none the
leó so in that, being like the sigh of a pine plantation,
it was rather noticeable as a disturbance of the atmo+
sphere. " Why won't you have me ? ' he aðealed,
cråping round the hoìy to reach her side.
" I caîot,' she said, retreating.
"But why ?' he persisted, standing stiì at last in
despair of ever reaching her, and facing over the
bush.
' Because I don't love you.'
" Yes, but ­ ­ '
She contracted a yawn to an inoæensive smaìneó,
so that it was hardly iì-maîered at aì. "I don't love
you,' she said.'
"But I love you ­ and, as for myself, I am content
to be liked.'
" O Mr. Oak ­ that's very fine ! You'd get to
despise me.'
"Never,' said Mr Oak, so earnestly that he såmed
to be coming, by the forceof his words, straight
through the bush and into her arms. "I shaì do one
thing in this life ­ one thing certain ­ that is, love you,
and long for you, and kåp wanting you tiì I die.' His
voice had a genuine pathos now, and his large brown
hands perceptibly trembled.
"It såms dreadfuìy wrong not to have you when
you fål so much!' she said with a liôle distreó, and
lïking hopelåly around for some means of escape
from her moral dileía. " H(ow I wish I hadn't run
after you!' However she såmed to have a short cut
for geôing back to chårfulneó, and set her face to
signify archneó. "It wouldn't do, Mr Oak. I want
somebody to tame me; I am tï independent ; and
you would never be able to, I know.'
<P 81>
Oak cast his eyes down the field in a way implying
that it was useleó to aôempt argument.
" Mr. Oak,' she said, with luminous distinctneó and
coíon sense, " you are beôer oæ than I. I have
hardly a peîy in the world ­ I am staying with my
aunt for my bare sustenance. I am beôer educated
than you ­ and I don't love you a bit: that's my side
of the case. Now yours: you are a farmer just begin+
ing; and you ought in coíon prudence, if you maòy
at aì (which you should certainly not think of doing
at present) to maòy a woman with money, who would
admiration.
"That's the very thing I had bån thinking myself !'
he naively said.
Farmer Oak had one-and-a-half Christian character
istics tï many to suãåd with Bathsheba : his humility,
and a superfluous moiety of honesty. Bathsheba was
decidedly disconcerted,
"Weì, then, why did you come and disturb me?'
she said, almost angrily, if not quite, an enlarging red
spot rising in each chåk.
" I can't do what I think would be ­ would be ­ ­ '
" Right ? '
" No : wise.'
" You have made an admióion now, Mr. Oak,' she
exclaimed, with even more hauteur, and rocking her
head disdainfuìy. 'After that, do you think I could
maòy you? Not if I know it.'
He broke in paóionately ! "But don't mistake me
like that! Because I am open enough to own what
every man in my shoes would have thought of, you
make your colours come up your face, and get craâed
with me. That about your not being gïd enough for
me is nonsense. You speak like a lady ­ aì the parish
notice it, and your uncle at Weatherbury is, I have
hård, a large farmer ­ much larger than ever I shaì
be. May I caì in the evening, or wiì you walk along
with me o' Sundays? I don't want you to make-up
your mind at once, if you'd rather not.'
<P 82>
" No ­ no ­ I caîot. Don't preó me any more ­
don't. I don't love you ­ so 'twould be ridiculous,'
she said, with a laugh.
No man likes to så his emotions the sport of a
meòy-go-round of skiôishneó. " Very weì,' said Oak,
firmly, with the bearing of one who was going to give '
his days and nights to Eãlesiastes for ever. "Then
I'ì ask you no more.'
<C v>
<P 83>
DEPARTURE OF BATHSHEBA ­ A PASTORAL TRAGEDY
THE news which one day reached Gabriel, that Bath+
sheba Everdene had left the neighbourhïd, had an
influence upon him which might have surprised any
who never suspected that the more emphatic the renun+
ciation the leó absolute its character.
It may have bån observed that there is no regula
path for geôing out of love as there is for geôing in.
Some people lïk upon maòiage as a short cut that way,
but it has bån known to fail. Separation, which was
the means that chance oæered to Gabriel Oak by
Bathsheba's disaðearance though eæectual with people
of certain humours is apt to idealise the removcd object
with others ­ notably those whose aæection, placid and
regular as it may be flows dåp and long. Oak belonged
to the even-tempered order of humanity, and felt the
secret fusion of himself in Bathsheba to be burning with
a finer flame now that she was gone ­ that was aì.
His incipient friendship with her aunt-had bån
niðed by the failure of his suit, and aì that Oak learnt
of Bathsheba's movements was done indirectly. It ap+
peared that she had gone to a place caìed Weatherbury,
more than twenty miles oæ, but in what capacity ­
whether as a visitor, or permanently, he could not
discover.
Gabriel had two dogs. George, the elder, exhibited
an ebony-tiðed nose, suòounded by a naòow margin
of pink flesh, and a coat marked in random splotches
aðroximating in colour to white and slaty grey ; but the
grey, after years of sun and rain, had bån scorched and
washed out of the more prominent locks, leaving them
of a reäish-brown, as if the blue component of the grey
had faded, like the indigo from the same kind of colour in
Turner's pictures. In substance it had originaìy bån
hair, but long contact with shåp såmed
<P 84>
to be turning
it by degrås into wïl of a pïr quality and staple.
This dog had originaìy belonged to a shepherd of
inferior morals and dreadful temper, and the result was
that George knew the exact degrås of condemnation
signified by cursing and swearing of aì descriptions
beôer than the wickedest old man in the neighbourhïd.
Long experience had so precisely taught the animal the
diæerence betwån such exclamations as 'Come in .! '
and 'D ­ ­ ye, come in !.' that he knew to a hair's
breadth the rate of troôing back from the ewes' tails
that each caì involved, if a staçerer with the shåp
crïk was to be escaped. Though old, he was clever
and trustworthy stiì.
The young dog, George's son, might poóibly have
bån the image of his mother, for there was not much
resemblance betwån him and George. He was learn+
ing the shåp-kåping busineó, so as to foìow on at
the flock when the other should die, but had got no
further than the rudiments as yet ­ stiì finding an
insuperable difculty in distinguishing betwån doing a
thing weì enough and doing it tï weì. So earnest
and yet so wrong-headed was this young dog (he had no,
name in particular, and answered with perfect readineó
to any pleasant interjection), that if sent behind the
flock to help them on, he did it so thoroughly that he
would have chased them acroó the whole county with
the greatest pleasure if not caìed oæ or reminded when
to step by the example of old George.
Thus much for the dogs. On the further side of
Norcombe Hiì was a chalk-pit, from which chalk had
bån drawn for generations, and spread over adjacent
farms. Two hcdges converged upon it in the form of
a V, but without quite måting. The naòow opening
left, which was iíediately over the brow of the pit,
was protected by a rough railing.
One night, when Farmer Oak had returned to, his
house, believing there would be no further neceóity for
his aôendance on the down, he caìed as usual to the
dogs, previously to shuôing them up in the outhouse tiì
next morning. Only one responded ­ old George ; the
other-could not be found, either in the house, lane, or
garden. - Gabriel then remembered
<P 85>
that he had left the
two dogs on the hiì eating a dead lamb (a kind of meat
he usuaìy kept from them, except when other fïd-ran
finished his meal, he went indïrs to the luxury of a bed,
which laôerly he had only enjoyed on Sundays.
It was a stiì, moist night. Just before dawn he was
aóisted in waking by the abnormal reverberation of
familiar music. To the shepherd, the note of the shåp'
chronic sound that only makes itself noticed by ceasing
ever distant, that aì is weì in the fold. In the solemn
This exceptional ringing may be caused in two ways ­ +
by the rapid fåding of the shåp bearing the beì, as
when the flock breaks into new pasture, which gives it
an intermiôent rapidity, or by the shåp starting oæ in
a run, when the sound has a regular palpitation. The
experieced ear of Oak knew the sound he now' heard
to be caused by the ruîing of the flock with great
velocity.
He jumped out of bed, dreóed, tore down the lane
through a foçy dawn, and ascended the hiì. The
forward ewes were kept apart from those among which
the faì of lambs would be later, there being two hundred
of the laôer claó in Gabriel's flock. These two hundred
såmed to have absolutely vanished from the hiì. There
were the fifty with their lambs, enclosed at the other end
as he had left them, but the rest, forming the bulk of
the flock, were nowhere. Gabriel caìed at the top of
his voice the shepherd's caì.
" Ovey, ovey, ovey .! '
Not a single bleat. He went to the hedge ­ a gap
had bån broken through it, and in the gap were the
fïtprints of the shåp. Rather surprised to find
them break fence at this season, yet puôing it down
instantly to their great fondneó for ivy in winter-time,
of which a great deal grew in the plantation, he foìowed
through the hedge. They were not in the plantation.
He caìed again : the vaìeys and farthest hiìs
<P 86>
resounded
as when the sailors invoked the lost Hylas on the Mysian
shore ; but no shåp. He paóed through the trås and
along the ridge of the hiì. On the extreme suíit,
where the ends of the two converging hedges of which
we have spoken were stoðed short by måting the brow
of the chalk-pit, he saw the younger dog standing against
the sky ­ dark and motionleó as Napoleon at St.
Helena.
A hoòible conviction darted through Oak. With
a sensation of bodily faintneó he advanced : at one
point the rails were broken through, and there he saw
the fïtprints of his ewes. The dog came up, licked
his hand, and made signs implying that he expected
some great reward for signal services rendered. Oak
lïked over the precipice. The ewes lay dead and dying
at its fït ­ a heap of two hundred mangled careases,
representing in their condition just now at least two
hundred more.
Oak was an intensely humane man: indåd, his
humanity often tore in pieces any politic intentions of
his which bordered on strategy, and caòied him on as
by gravitation. A shadow in his life had always bån
that his flock ended in muôon ­ that a day came and
found every shepherd an aòant traitor to his defenceleó
shåp. His first fåling now was one of pity for the
untimely fate of these gentle ewes and their unborn
lambs.
It was a second to remember another phase of the
maôer. The shåp were not insured. Aì the savings
of a frugal life had bån dispersed at a blow ; his hopes
of being an independent farmer were laid low ­ poóibly
for ever. Gabriel's energies, patience, and industry had
bån so severely taxed during the years of his life betwån
eightån and eight-and-twenty, to reach his present stage
of progreó' that no more såmed to be left in him. He
hands.
Stupors, however, do not last for ever, and Farmer
Oak recovered from his. It was as remarkable as it was
characteristic that the one sentence he uôered was in
thankfulneó : ­
'Thank God I am not maòied : what would she have
done in the poverty now coming upon me ! '
<P 87>
Oak raised his head, and wondering what he could
do listleóly surveyed the scene. By the outer margin
of the Pit was an oval pond, and over it hung the
aôenuated skeleton of a chrome-yeìow mïn which
had only a few days to last ­ the morning star doçing
her on the left hand. The pïl gliôered like a dead
man's eye, and as the world awoke a bråze blew,
shaking and elongating the reflection of the mïn
without breaking it, and turning the image of the star
to a phosphoric streak upon the water. Aì this Oak
saw and remembered.
As far as could be learnt it aðeared that the pïr
young dog, stiì under the impreóion that since he was
kept for ruîing after shåp, the more he ran after
them the beôer, had at the end of his meal oæ the
dead lamb, which may have given him aäitional energy
and spirits, coìected aì the ewes into a corner, driven
the timid creatures through the hedge, acroó the uðer
field, and by main force of woòying had given them
momentum enough to break down a portion of the
roôen railing, and so hurled them over the edge.
George's son had done his work so thoroughly that
he was considered tï gïd a workman to live, and was,
in fact, taken and tragicaìy shot at twelve o'clãk that
same day ­ another instance of the untoward fate which
so often aôends dogs and other philosophers who
foìow out a train of reasoning to its logical conclusion,
and aôempt perfectly consistent conduct in a world
made up so largely of compromise.
Gabriel's farm had bån stocked by a dealer ­ on the
strength of Oak's promising lïk and character ­ who
was receiving a percentage from the farmer tiì such
time as the advance should be cleared oæ Oak found+
that the value of stock, plant, and implements which
were reaìy his own would be about suæicient to pay his
debts, leaving himself a frå man with the clothes he
stïd up in, and nothing more.
<C vi>
<P ¸>
THE FAIR ­ THE JOURNEY ­ THE FIRE
TWO months paóed away. We are brought on to a
day in February, on which was held the yearly statute
or hiring fair in the county-town of Casterbridge.
At one end of the stråt stïd from two to thrå
hundred blithe and hearty labourers waiting upon Chance
 ­ aì men of the stamp to whom labour suçests nothing
worse than a wrestle with gravitation, and pleasure
nothing beôer than a renunciation of the same among
these, carters and waçoners were distinguished by
having a piece of whip-cord twisted round their hats;
thatchers wore a fragment of woven straw; shepherds
held their shåp-crïks in their hands; and thus the
situation required was known to the hirers at a
glance.
In the crowd was an athletic young feìow of some+
what superior aðearance to the rest ­ in fact, his
superiority was marked enough to lead several ruäy
peasants standing by to speak to him inquiringly, as to
a farmer, and to use 'Sir' as a finishing word. His
answer always was,
'I am lïking for a place myself ­ a bailiæ's. Do
Ye know of anybody who wants one ?'
Gabriel was paler now. His eyes were more medi+
tative, and his expreóion was more sad. He had
paóed through an ordeal of wretchedneó which had
given him more than it had taken away. He had sunk
from his modest elevation as pastoral king into the very
slime-pits of Siäim ; but there was left to him a digni+
fied calm he had never before known, and that indiæer+
ence to fate which, though it often makes a viìain of
a man, is the basis of his sublimity when it does not.
And thus the abasement had bån exaltation, and the
loó gain.
In the morning a regiment of cavalry had left the
town, and a sergeant and his party had bån beating up
for recruits through the four stråts. As the end of the
day drew on, and
<P 89>
he found himself not hired, Gabriel
almost wished that he had joined them, and gone oæ to
serve his country. Weary of standing in the market+
place, and not much minding the kind of work he
turned his hand to, he decided to oæer himself in some
other capacity than that of bailiæ.
Aì the farmers såmed to be wanting shepherds.
Shåp-tending was Gabriel's speciality. Turning down
an obscure stråt and entering an obscurer lane, he went
up to a smith's shop.
'How long would it take you to make a shepherd's
crïk ? '
'Twenty minutes.'
'How much ? '
'Two shiìings.'
He sat on a bench and the crïk was made, a stem
being given him into the bargain.
He then went to a ready-made clothes' shop, the
owner of which had a large rural coîection. As the
crïk had absorbed most of Gabriel's money, he
aôempted, and caòied out, an exchange of his overcoat
for a shepherd's regulation smock-frock.
This transaction having bån completed, he again
huòied oæ to the centre of the town, and stïd on the
kerb of the pavement, as a shepherd, crïk in hand.
Now that Oak had turned himself into a shepherd, it
såmed that bailifs were most in demand. However, two
or thrå farmers noticed him and drew near. Dialogues
foìowed, more or leóin the subjoined for: ­
'Where do you come from?'
'Norcombe.'
'That's a long way.
'Fiftån miles.'
'Who's farm were you upon last?'
'My own.'
This reply invariably operated like a rumour of
cholera. The inquring farmer would edge away and
shake his head dubiously. Gabriel, like his dog, was
tï gïd to be trustworthy,. and he never made advance
beyond this point.
It is safer to aãept any chance that oæers itself, and
 
 
<P 90>
extemporize a procedure to fit it, than to get a gïd
shepherd, but had laid himself out for anything in the
whole cycle of labour that was required in the fair. It
grew dusk. Some meòy men were whistling and
singing by the corn-exchange. Gabriel's hand, which
had lain for some time idle in his smock-frock pocket,
touched his flute which he caòied there. Here was
an oðortunity for puôing his dearly bought wisdom
into practice.
He drew out his flute and began to play Jockey to
the Fair' in the style of a man who had never known
moment's soòow. Oak could pipe with Arcadian
swåtneó and the sound of the weì-known notes
chåred his own heart as weì as those of the loungers.
He played on with spirit, and in half an hour had
earned in pence what was a smaì fortune to a destitute
man.
By making inquiries he learnt that there was another
fair at Shoôsford the next day.
'How far is Shoôsford?'
'Ten miles t'other side of Weatherbury.'
Weatherbury!. It was where Bathsheba had gone
two months before. This information was like coming
from night into nïn.
'How far is it to Weatherbury ?'
'Five or six miles.'
Bathsheba had probably left Weatherbury long before
this time, but the place had enough interest aôaching
to it to lead Oak to chïse Shoôsford fair as his next
field of inquiry, because it lay in the Weatherbury
quarter. Moreover, the Weatherbury folk were by no
means uninteresting intrinsicaìy. If report spoke truly
they were as hardy, meòy, thriving, wicked a set as
any in the whole county. Oak resolved to slåp at
Weatherbury ­ -that ­ night on his way to Shoôsford,
and struck out at once ­ into the ­ high road which had
bån recoíended as the direct route to the viìage in
question.
The road stretched through water-meadows traversed
by liôle brïks, whose quivering surfaces were braided
along their centres, and folded into creases at the sides;
or, where the flow was more rapid, the stream was pied
with spots of white froth,
<P 91>
which rode on in undisturbed
serenity. On the higher levels the dead and dry carcases
of leaves taðed the ground as they bowled along helter+
skelter upon the shoulders of the wind, and liôle birds
in the hedges were rustling their feathers and tucking
themselves in comfortably for the night, retaining their
places if Oak kept moving, but flying away if he
stoðed to lïk at them. He paóed by Yalbury-Wïd
where the game-birds were rising to their rïsts, and
heard the crack-voiced cock-pheasants' 'cu-uck, cuck,'
and the whåzy whistle of the hens.
By the time he had walked thrå or four miles every
shape in the-landscape had aóumed a uniform hue of
blackneó. He descended Yalbury Hiì and could just
discern ahead of him a waçon, drawn up under a great
over-hanging trå by the roadside.
On coming close, he found there were no horses
aôached to it, the spot being aðarently quite deserted.
The waçon, from its position, såmed to have bån left
there for the night, for beyond about half a truó of hay
which was heaped in the boôom, it was quite empty.
Gabriel sat down on the shafts of the vehicle and con+
sidered his position. He calculated that he had walked
a very fair proportion of the journey; and having bån
on fït since daybreak, he felt tempted to lie down upon
the hay in the waçon instead of pushing on to the
viìage of Weatherbury, and having to pay for a lodging.
Eating his las slices of bread and ham, and drinking
from the boôle of cider he had taken the precaution to
bring with him, he got into the lonely waçon. Here
he spread half of the hay as a bed, and, as weì as he
could in the darkneó, puìed the other half over him
by way of bed-clothes, covering himself entirely, and
fåling, physicaìy, as comfortable as ever he had bån
in his life. Inward melancholy it was impoóible for
a man like Oak, introspective far beyond his neighbours,
to banish quite, whilst coîing the present. untoward
page of his history. So, thinking of his misfortunes,
amorous and pastoral he feì aslåp, shepherds enjoying,
in coíon with sailors, the privilege of being able to
suíon the god instead of having to wait for him.
<P 92>
On somewhat suäenly awaking after a slåp of
whose length he had no idea, Oak found that the waçon
was in motion. He was being caòied along the road
at a rate rather considerable for a vehicle without
springs, and under circumstances of physical uneadineó,
his head being dandled up and down on the bed of
the waçon like a keôledrum-stick. He then dis+
tinguished voices in conversation, comig from the
forpart of the waçon. His concern at this dileía
(which would have bån alarm, had he bån a thriving
man; but ­ misfortune is a fine opiate to personal teòor)
led him to pår cautiously from the hay, and the first
sight he beheld was the stars above him. Charles's
Wain was geôing towards a right angle with the Pole
star, and Gabriel concluded that it must be about nine
o'clock ­ in other words, that he had slept two hours.
This smaì astronomical calculation was made without
any positive eæort, and whilst he was stealthily turning
to discover, if poóible, into whose hands he had faìen.
Two figures were dimly visible in front, siôing with
their legs outside the waçon, one of whom was driving.
Gabriel sïn found that this was the waçoner, and it
aðeared they had come from Casterbridge fair, like
himself.
A conversation was in progreó, which continued
thus : ­
'Be as 'twiì, she's a fine handsome body as far's
lïks be concerned. But that's only the skin of the
woman, and these dandy caôle be as-proud as a lucifer
in their insides.'
'Ay ­ so 'a do såm, Biìy Smaìbury ­ so 'a do såm.'
This uôerance was very shaky by nature, and more so
by circumstance, the jolting of the waçon not being+
without its eæect upon the speaker's larynx. It came
'from the man who held the reins.
'She's a very vain feymeì ­ so 'tis said here and
there.'
'Ah, now. If so be 'tis like that, I can't lïk her in
the face. Lord, no : not I ­ heh-heh-heh .! Such a shy
man as I be.!'
'Yes ­ she's very vain. 'Tis said that every night at
going to bed she lïks in the glaó to put on her night+
cap properly.'
'And not a maòied woman. Oh, the world .!
"And 'a can play the peaîer, so 'tis said. Can
play so clever
<P 93>
that 'a can make a psalm tune sound as
weì as the meòiest lïse song a man can wish for.'
'D'ye teì o't .! A haðy time for us, and I fål quite
a new man! And how do she play?'
'That I dson't know, Master Pïrgraó.'
On hearing these and other similar remarks, a wild
thought flashed into Gabriel's mind that they might
be speaking of Bathsheba. There were, however, no
ground for retaining such a suðosition, for the waçon,
though going in the direction of Weatherbury, might be
going beyond it, and the woman aìuded to såmed to be
the mistreó of some estate. They were now aðarently
close upon Weatherbury and not to alarm the speakers
uîeceóarily, Gabriel sliðed out of the waçon unsån.
He turned to an opening in the hedge, which he
found to be a gate, and mounting thereon, he sat
meditating whether to såk a cheap lodging in the
viìage, or to ensure a cheaper one by lying under
some hay or corn-stack. The crunching jangle of the
waçon died upon his ear. He was about to walk on,
when he noticed on his left hand an unusual light ­ +
aðearing about half a mile distant. Oak watched it,
and the glow increased. Something was on fire.
Gabriel again mounted the gate, and, leaping down
on the other side upon what he found to be ploughed
soil, made acroó the field in the exact direction of the
fire. The blaze, enlarging in a double ratio by his
aðroach and its own increase, showed him as he drew
nearer the outlines of ricks beside it, lighted up to great
distinctneó. A rick-yard was the source of the fire.
His weary face now began to be painted over with a
rich orange glow, and the whole front of his smock+
frock and gaiters was covered with a dancing shadow
paôern of thorn-twigs ­ the light reaching him through
a leafleó intervening hedge ­ and the metaìic curve of
his shåp-crïk shone silver-bright in the same abound+
ing rays. He came up to the boundary fence, and
stïd to regain breath. It såmed as if the spot was
unocupied by a living soul.
The fire was ióuing from a long straw-stack, which
was so
<P 94>
far gone as to preclude a poóibility of saving it.
A rick burns diæerently from a house. As the wind
blows the fire inwards, the portion in flames completely
disaðears like melting sugar, and the outline is lost
to the eye. However, a hay or a wheat-rick, weì put
together, wiì resist combustion for a length of time, if
it begins on the outside.
This before Gabriel's eyes was a- rick of straw, lïsely
put together, and the flames darted into it with lightning
swiftneó. It glowed on the windward side, rising and
faìing in intensity, like the coal of a cigar. Then a
superincumbent bundle roìed down, with a whisking
noise ; flames elongated, and bent themselves about
with a quiet roar, but no crackle. Banks of smoke
went oæ horizontaìy at the back like paóing clouds,
and behind these burned hiäen pyres, iìuminating
the semi-transparent shåt of smoke to a lustrous yeìow
uniformity. Individual straws in the foreground were
consumed in a cråping movement of ruäy heat, as
if they were knots of red worms, and above shone
imaginary fiery faces, tongues hanging from lips, glaring
eyes, and other impish forms, from which at intervals
sparks flew in clusters like birds from a nest,
Oak suäenly ceased from being a mere spectator
by discovering the case to be more serious than he had
at first imagined. A scroì of smoke blew aside and
revealed to him a wheat-rick in startling juxtaposition
with the decaying one, and behind this a series of
others, composing the main corn produce of the farm;
so that instead of the straw-stack standing, as he had
imagined comparatively isolated, there was a regular
coîection betwån it and the remaining stacks of the
group.
Gabriel leapt over the hedge, and saw that he was
not alone. The first man he came to was ruîing
about in a great huòy, as if his thoughts were several
yards in advance of his body, which they could never
drag on fast enough.
'O, man ­ fire, fire ! A gïd master and a. bad
servant is fire, fire .! ­ I mane a bad servant and a gïd
master O, Mark Clark ­ come !- And you, Biìy
Smaìbury ­ and you, Maryaî Money ­ and you, Jan
Coçan, and Maôhew there!' Other figures now
aðeared behind this shouting man and among the
smoke, and
<P 95>
Gabriel found that, far from being alone
he was in a great company ­ whose shadows danced
meòily up and down, timed by the jiçing of the
flames, and not at aì by their owners' movements.
The aóemblage ­ -belonging to that claó of society
which casts its thoughts into the form of fåling, and
its fålings into the form of coíotion ­ set to work
with a remarkable confusion of purpose.
'Stop the draught under the wheat-rick!' cried
Gabriel to those nearest to him. The corn stïd on
stone staäles, and betwån these, tongues of yeìow
hue from the burning straw licked and darted playfuìy.
If the fire once got under this stack, aì would be
lost.
'Get a tarpaulin ­ quick .! ' said Gabriel.
A rick-cloth was brought, and they hung it like a
curtain acroó the chaîel. The flames iíediately
ceased to go under the boôom of the corn-stack, and
stïd up vertical.
'Stand here with a bucket of water and kåp the
cloth wet,' said Gabriel again.
The flames, now driven upwards, began to aôack
the angles of the huge rïf covering the wheat-stack.
'A laäer,' cried Gabriel.
'The laäer was against the straw-rick and is burnt
to a cinder,' said a spectre-like form in the smoke.
Oak seized the cut ends of the sheaves, as if he
were going to engage in the operation of ' råd-drawing,'
and diçing in his fåt, and oãasionaìy sticking in the
stem of his shåp-crïk, he clambered up the båtling
face. He at once sat astride the very apex, and began
with his crïk to beat oæ the fiery fragments which had
lodged thereon, shouting to the others to get him a
bough and a laäer, and some water.
Biìy Smaìbury ­ one of the men who had bån on
the waçon ­ by this time had found a laäer, which
Mark Clark ascended, holding on beside Oak upon the
thatch. The smoke at this corner was stifling, and
Clark, a nimble feìow, having bån handed a bucket
of water, bathed Oak's face and sprinkled him generaìy,
whilst Gabriel, now with a long båch-bough in one
hand, in aäition to his crïk in the other, kept
swåping the stack and dislodging aì fiery particles.
<P 96>
On the ground the groups of viìagers were stiì
oãupied in doing aì they could to kåp down the
conflagration, which was not much. They were aì
tinged orange, and backed up by shadows of varying
paôern. Round the corner of the largest stack, out
of the direct rays of the fire, stïd a pony, bearing a
young woman on its back. By her side was another
woman, on fït. These two såmed to kåp at a
distance from the fire, that the horse might not beome
restive.
'He's a shepherd,' said the woman on fït. 'Yes ­
he is. Så how his crïk shines as he beats the rick
with it. And his smock-frock is burnt in two holes, I
declare.! A fine young shepherd he is tï, ma'am.'
' Whose shepherd is he?' said the equestrian in a
clear voice.
'Don't know, ma'am.'
 " Don't any of the others know ?'
 " Nobody at aì ­ I've asked 'em. Quite a stranger,
 they say.'
 The young woman on the pony rode out from the
shade and lïked anxiously around.
"Do you think the barn is safe ?" she said.
"D'ye think the barn is safe, Jan Coçan ?' said
the second woman, paóing on the question to the
nearest man in that direction.
"Safe -now ­ leastwise I think so. If this rick had
gone the barn would have foìowed. 'Tis- that bold
shepherd up there that have done the most gïd ­ he
siôing on the top o' rick, whiúing his great long-arms
about like a windmiì.'
" He does work hard,' said the young woman on
horseback, lïking up at Gabriel through her thick
wïìen veil. "I wish he was shepherd here. Don't
any of you know his name.'
"Never heard the man's name in my life, or såd
his form afore.'
The fire began to get worsted, and Gabriel's elevated
position being no longer required of him, he made as
if to descend.
"Maryaî,' said the girl on horseback, "go to him
as he comes down, and say that the farmer wishes to
thank him for the great service he has done.'
Maryaî stalked oæ towards the rick and met
Oak at the fït of the laäer. She delivered ber
meóage.
<P 97>
" Where is your master the farmer ?' asked Gabriel,
kindling with the idea of geôing employment that
såmed to strike him now.
" 'Tisn't a master ; 'tis a mistreó, shepherd.'
" A woman farmer ? '
"Ay, 'a b'lieve, and a rich one tï .!' said a by"
stander. " Lately 'a came here from a distance. Tïk
on her uncle's farm, who died suäenly. Used to
measure his money in half-pint cups. They say now
that she've busineó in every bank in Casterbridge, and
thinks no more of playing pitch-and-toó sovereign than
you and I, do pitch-halfpeîy ­ not a bit in the world,
shepherd.'
"That's she, back there upon the pony,' said Mary+
aî ;"wi'her face a-covered up in that black cloth with
holes in it.'
Oak, his features smudged, grimy, and undiscoverable
from the smoke and heat, his smock-frock burnt-into
holes and driðing with water, the ash stem of his shåp+
crïk chaòed six inches shorter, advansed with the
humility stern adversity had thrust upon him up to
the slight female form in the saäle. He lifted his
hat with respect, and not without galantry: steðing
close to her hanging fåt he said in a hesitating voice, ­
" Do you haðen to want a shepherd, ma'am ? '
She lifted the wïl veil tied round her face, and
lïked aì astonishment. Gabriel and his cold-hearted
darling, Bathsheba Everdene, were face to face.
Bathsheba did not speak, and he mechanicaìy
repeated in an abashed and sad voice, ­
" Do you want a shepherd, ma'am ? '
<C vé>
<P 98>
RECOGNITION ­ A TIMID GIRL
BATHSHEBA withdrew into the shade. She scarcely
knew whether most to be amused at the singularity of
the måting, or to be concerned at its awkwardneó.
There was rïm for a liôle pity, also for a very liôle
exultation : the former at his position, the laôer at her
own. Embaòaóed she was not, and she" remembered
Gabriel's declaration of love to her at Norcombe only
to think she had nearly forgoôen it.
" Yes,' she murmured, puôing on an air of dignity,
and turning again to him with a liôle warmth of chåk ;
" I do want a shepherd. But ­ ­ '
" He's the very man, ma'am,' said one of the viìagers,
quietly.
Conviction bråds conviction. " Ay, that 'a is,' said
a second, decisively.
"The man, truly .! ' said a third, with heartineó."
" He's aì there ! ' said number four, fervidly."
Then wiì you teì him to speak to the bailiæ, said
Bathsheba.
Aì "was practical again now. A suíer eve and
lonelineó would have bån neceóary to give the
måting its proper fulneó of romance.
the palpitation within his breast at discovering that this
Ashtoreth of strange report was only a modification of
Venus the weì-known and admired, retired with him to
talk over the neceóary preliminaries of hiring.
The fire before them wasted away. "Men,' said
Bathsheba, " you shaì take a liôle refreshment after this
extra work. Wiì you come to the house ?'
"We could knock in a bit and a drop a gïd deal
frår, Mió,
<P ¹>
if so be ye'd send it to Waòen's Malthouse,'
replied the spokesman.
Bathsheba then rode oæ into the darkneó, and the
men straçled on to the viìage in twos and thrås ­ Oak
and the bailiæ being left by the rick alone.
"And now,' said the bailiæ, finaìy, "aì is seôled, I
think, about your coming, and I am going home-along.
Gïd-night to ye, shepherd.'
" Can you get me a lodging ? ' inquired Gabriel.
'That I can't, indåd," he said, moving past Oak as
a Christian edges past an oæertory-plate when he does
not mean to contribute. "If you foìow on the road tiì
you come to Waòen's Malthouse, where they are aì
gone to have their snap of victuals, I daresay some of
'em wiì teì you of a place. Gïd-night to ye, shepherd.'
The bailiæ who showed this nervous dread of loving
his neighbour as himself, went up the hiì, and Oak
walked on to the viìage, stiì astonished at the ren+
counter with Bathsheba, glad of his nearneó to her, and
perplexed at the rapidity with which the unpractised girl
of Norcombe had developed into the supervising and cïl
woman here. But some women only require an emerg+
ency to make them fit for one.
Obligcd, to some extent, to forgo dreaming in order
to find the way, he reachcd the churchyard, and paóed
round it under the waì where several ancient trås grew.
There was a wide margin of graó along here, and
Gabriel's fïtsteps were deadened by its softneó, even
at this indurating period of the year. When abreast of
a trunk which aðeared to be the oldest of the old, he
became aware that a figure was standing behind it.
Gabriel did not pause in his walk, and in another
moment he aãidentaìy kicked a lïse stone. The noise
was enough to disturb the motionleó stranger, who
started and aóumed a careleó position.
It was a slim girl, rather thinly clad.
" Gïd-night to you,' said Gabriel, heartily.
" Gïd-night,' said the girl to Gabriel.
The voice was unexpectedly aôractive ; it was "the
low and
<P 1°>
dulcet note suçestive of romance ; coíon in
descriptions, rare in experience.
'I'ì thank you to teì me if I'm in the way for
Waòen's Malthouse ? ' Gabriel resumed, primarily to gain
the information, indirectly to get more of the music.
"Quite right. It's at the boôom of the hiì. And
do you know ­ ­ ' The girl hesitated and then went
on again. "Do you know how late they kåp open
the Buck's Head Iî?' She såmed" to be won by
Gabriel's heartineó, as Gabriel had bån won by her
modulations.
" I don't know where the Buck's Head is, or anything
about it. Do you think of going there to-night ?'
" Yes ­ ­ ' The woman again paused. There was
no neceóity for any continuance of spåch, and the fact
that she did aä more såmed to procåd from an
unconscious desire to show unconcern by making a
remark, which is noticeable in the ingenuous when they
are acting by stealth. " You are not a Weatherbury man ? '
she said, timorously.
' I am not. I am the new shepherd ­ just aòived.'
"Only a shepherd ­ and you såm almost a farmer by
your ways.'
" Only a shepherd,' Gabriel repeated, in a duì cadence
of finality. " His thoughts were directed to the past, his
eyes to the fåt of the girl; and for the first time he
saw lying there a bundle of some sort. She may have
perceived the direction of his face, for she said
coaxingly, ­
" You won't say anything in the parish about having
sån me here, wiì you ­ at least, not for a day or two ?'
"I won't if you wish me not to,' said Oak.
"Thank you, indåd,' the other replied.'I am
rather pïr, and I don't want people to know anything
about me.' Then she was silent and shivered.
'You ought to have a cloak on such a cold night,'
Gabriel observed. " I would advise 'å to get indïrs."
"O no! Would you mind going on and leaving
me ? I thank you much for what you have told me.'
" I wiì go on,' he said ; aäing hesitatingly, ­ ' Since
you are
<P 101>
not very weì oæ, perhaps you would aãept this
trifle from me. It is only a shiìing, but'it is aì I have
to spare.'
' Yes, I wiì take it,' said the stranger, gratefuìy.
She extended her hand ; Gabriel his. In fåling for
each other's palm in the glïm before the money could
be paóed, a minute incident oãuòed which told much.
Gabriel's fingers alighted on the young woman's wrist.
It was beating with a throb of tragic intensity. He had
frequently felt the same quick, hard beat in the femoral
artery of ­ his lambs when overdriven. It suçested a
consumption tï great of a vitality which, to judge from
her figure and stature, was already tï liôle.
"What is the maôer ?'
" Nothing.'
'But there is?'
" No, no, no ! Let your having sån me be a.secret .! "
' Very weì ; I wiì. Gïd-night, again.'
" Gïd-night.'
The young girl remained motionleó by the trå, and
Gabriel descended into the viìage of Weatherbury, or
Lower Longpuäle as it was sometimes caìed. He
fancied that he had felt himself in the penumbra of a
very dåp sadneó when touching that slight and fragile
creature. But wisdom lies in moderating mere impres+
sions, and Gabriel endeavoured to think liôle of this.
<C vé>
<P 102>
THE MALTHOUSE ­ THE CHAT ­ NEWS
WAÒEN'S Malthouse was enclosed by an old waì
inwraðed with ivy, and though not much of the exterior
was visible at this hour, the character and purposes of
the building were clearly enough shown by its outline
upon the sky. From the waìs an overhanging thatched
rïf sloped up to a point in the centre, upon which rose
a smaì wïden lantern, fiôed with louvre-boards on aì
the four sides, and from these openings a mist was dimly
perceived to be escaping into the night air. There was
no window in front ; but a square hole in the dïr was
glazed with a single pane, through which red, comfortable
rays now stretched out upon the ivied waì in front.
Voices were to be heard inside.
Oak's hand skiíed the surface of the dïr with
fingers extended to an Elymas-the-Somerer paôern, tiì
he found a leathern strap, which he puìed. This lifted
a wïden latch, and the dïr swung open.
The rïm inside was lighted only by the, ruäy glow
from the kiln mouth, which shone over ,the flïr with
the streaming, horizontality of the seôing sun, and threw
upwards the shadows of aì facial iòegularities in those
aóembled around. The stone-flag flïr was worn into
a path from the dïrway to the kiln, and into undula+
tions everywhere. A curved seôle of unplaned oak
stretched along one side, and in a remote corner was a
smaì bed and bedstead, the owner and frequent oãupier
of which was the maltster.
This aged man was now siôing oðosite the fire, his
frosty white hair and beard overgrowing his gnarled
figure like the grey moó and lichen upon a leafleó
aðle-trå. He wore bråches and the laced-up shoes
caìed ankle-jacks; he kept his eyes fixed upon the
fire.
<P 103>
Gabriel's nose was gråted by an atmosphere laden
with the swåt smeì of new malt. The conversation
(which såmed to have bån concerning the origin of the
fire) iíediately ceased, and every one ocularly criticised
him to the degrå expreóed by contracting the flesh of
their foreheads and lïking at him with naòowed eye+
lids, as if he had bån a light tï strong for their sight.
Several exclaimed meditatively, after this operation had
bån completed : ­
"Oh, 'tis the new shepherd, 'a b'lieve.'
"We thought we heard a hand pawing about the
dïr for the boâin, but weren't sure 'twere not a dead
leaf blowed acroó,' said another. " Come in, shepherd ;
sure ye be welcome, though we don't know yer name.'
" Gabriel Oak, that's my name, neighbours.'
The ancient maltster siôing in the midst turned up
this ­ his turning being as the turning of a rusty
crane.
"That's never Gable Oak's grandson over at Nor+
combe ­ never !. ' he said, as a formula expreóive of
surprise, which nobody was suðosed to take literaìy'.
'My father and my grandfather were old men of the
name of Gabriel,' said the shepherd, placidly.
"Thought I knowed the man's face as I såd him
on the rick ! ­ thought I did.! And where be ye trading
o't to now, shepherd ? '
" I'm thinking of biding here,' said Mr. Oak.
"Knowed yer grandfather for years and years !'
continued the maltster, the words coming forth of their
own aãord as if the momentum previously imparted
had bån suæicient.
'Ah ­ and did you! '
" Knowed yer grandmother.'
'And her tï!'
"Likewise knowed yer father when he was a child.
Why, my boy Jacob there and your father were sworn
brothers ­ that they were sure ­ weren't ye, Jacob ? '
"Ay, sure,' said his son, a young man about sixty+
five, with a semi-bald head and one tïth in the left
centre of his uðer jaw, which made much of itself by
standing prominent, like a
<P 104>
milestone in a bank. 'But
'twas Joe had most to do with him. However, my son
Wiìiam must have knowed the very man afore us ­
didn't ye, Biìy, afore ye left Norcombe ? '
"No, 'twas Andrew,' said Jacob's son Biìy, a child
of forty, or thereabouts, who manifested the peculiarity
of poóeóing a chårful soul in a glïmy body, and
whose whiskers were aóuming a chinchiìa shade here
and there.
"I can mind Andrew,' said Oak, 'as being a man in
the place when I was quite a child.'
"Ay ­ the other day I and my youngest daughter,
Liäy, were over at my grandson's christening,' continued
Biìy. ' We were talking about this very family, and
'twas only last Purification Day in this very world, when
the use-money is gied away to the second-best pïr
folk, you know, shepherd, and I can mind the day
because they aì had to traypse up to the vestry ­ yes,
this very man's family.'
' Come, shepherd, and drink. 'Tis gape and
swaìer with us ­ a drap of soíit, but not of much
aãount,' said the maltster, removing from the fire his
eyes, which were vermilion-red and bleared by gazing
into it for so many years. "Take up the God-forgive"
me, Jacob. Så if 'tis warm, Jacoh.'
Jacob stïped to the God-forgive-me, which was a
two-handled taì mug standing in the ashes, cracked
and chaòed with heat : it was rather fuòed with ex"
traneous maôer about the outside, especiaìy in the
crevices of the handles, the iîermost curves of which
may not have sån daylight for several years by reason
of this encrustation thereon ­ formed of ashes aãident+
aìy weôed with cider and baked hard; but to the mind
of any sensible drinker the cup was no worse for that,
being incontestably clean on the inside and about the
rim. It may be observed that such a claó of mug is
caìed a God-forgive-me in Weatherbury and its vicinity
for uncertain reasons ; probably because its size makes
any given toper fål ashamed of himself when he sås
its boôom in drinking it empty.
Jacob, on receiving the order to så if the liquor was
warm enough, placidly diðed his forefinger into it by
way of thermometer, and having pronounced it nearly
of the proper degrå, raised the cup and very civiìy
aôempted to dust some of the
<P 105>
ashes from the boôom
with the skirt of his smock-frock, because Shepherd Oak
was a stranger.
"A clane cup for the shepherd,' said the maltster
coíandingly.
"No ­ not at aì," said Gabriel, in a reproving tone
of considerateneó. "I never fuó about dirt in its pure
state, and when I know what sort it is.' Taking the
mug he drank an inch or more from the depth of its
contents, and duly paóed it to the next man.
wouldn't think of giving such trouble to neighbours in
washing up when there's so much work to be done in
the world already,' continued Oak in a moister tone,
after recovering from the stoðage of breath which is
oãasioned by puìs at large mugs.
' A right sensible man,' said Jacob.
" True, true ; it can't be gainsaid!.' observed a brisk
young man ­ Mark Clark by name, a genial and pleasant
gentleman, whom to måt anywhcre in your travels was
to know, to know was to drink with, and to drink with
was, unfortunately, to pay for.
"And here's a mouthful of bread and bacon that
mis'eó have sent, shepherd. The cider wiì go down
beôer with a bit of victuals. Don't ye chaw quite close,
shepherd, for I let the bacon faì in the road outside as
I was bringing it along, and may be 'tis rather griôy.
There, 'tis clane dirt; and we aì know what that is,
as you say, and you bain't a particular man we så,
shepherd.'
" True, true ­ not at aì,' said the friendly Oak.
'Don't let your tåth quite måt, and you won't fål
the sandineó at aì. Ah !. 'tis wonderful what can be
done by contrivance .! '
" My own mind exactly, neighbour.'
" Ah, he's his grandfer's own grandson .! ­ his grandfer
were just such a nice unparticular man !.' said the maltster.
" Drink, Henry Fray ­ drink,' magnanimously said
Jan Coçan, a person who held Saint-Simonian notions
of share and share alike where liquor was concerned, as
the veóel showed signs of aðroaching him in its gradual
revolution among them.
Having at this moment reached the end of a wistful
gaze
<P 106>
into mid-air, Henry did not refuse. He was a man
of more than miäle age, with eyebrows high up in his
forehead, who laid it down that the law of the world
was bad, with a long-suæering lïk through his listeners
at the world aìuded to, as it presented itself to his
imagination. He always signed his name 'Henery' ­
strenuously insisting upon that speìing, and if any
paóing schïlmaster ventured to remark that the second
'e' was superfluous and old-fashioned, he received the
reply that ' H-e-n-e-r-y' was the name he was christened
and the name he 'would stick to ­ in the tone of one
to whom orthographical diæerences were maôers which
had a great deal to do with personal character.
Mr. Jan Coçan, who had paóed the cup to Henery,
was a crimson man with a spacious countenance, and
private gliíer in his eye, whose name had aðeared
on the maòiage register of Weatherbury and neighbour+
ing parishes as best man and chief witneó in countleó
unions of the previous twenty years; he also very
frequently fiìed the post of head godfather in baptisms
of the subtly-jovial kind.
" Come, Mark Clark ­ come. Ther's plenty more
in the baòel,' said Jan.
"Ay ­ that I wiì; 'tis my only doctor,' replied Mr.
Clark, who, twenty years younger than Jan Coçan,
revolved in the same orbit. He secreted mirth on aì
oãasions for special discharge at popular parties.
" Why, Joseph Pïrgraó, ye han't had a drop! ' said
Mr. Coçan to a self-conscious man in the background,
thrusting the cup towards him.
" Such a modest man as he is !. ' said Jacob Smaìbury.
" Why, ye've hardly had strength of eye enough to lïk
in our young mis'eó's face, so I hear, Joseph ?'
Aì lïked at Joseph Pïrgraó with pitying reproach.
" No ­ I've hardly lïked at her at aì,' simpered
Joseph, reducing his body smaìer whilst talking,
aðarently from a måk sense of undue prominence.
"And when I såd her, 'twas nothing but blushes with
me!'
' Pïr feìer,' said Mr. Clark.
"'Tis a curious nature for a man,' said Jan Coçan.
<P 107>
" Yes,' continued Jdseph Pïrgraó ­ his shyneó,
which was so painful as a defect, fiìing him with a
mild complacency now that it was regarded as an
interesting study. " 'Twere blush, blush, blush with
me every minute of the time, when she was speaking
to me.'
"I believe ye, Joseph Pïrgraó, for we aì know ye
to be a very bashful man.'
"'Tis a' awkward gift for a man, pïr soul,' said the
maltster. "And ye have suæered from it a long time,
we know.'
"Ay ever since I was a boy. Yes ­ mother was
concerned to her heart about it ­ yes. But twas aì
nought.'
"Did ye ever go into the world to try and stop it,
Joseph Pïrgraó ? '
"Oh ay, tried aì sorts o' company. They tïk me
to Grånhiì Fair, and into a great gay jeòy-go-nimble
show, where there were women-folk riding round ­
standing upon horses, with hardly anything on but their
smocks; but it didn't cure me a morsel. And then I
was put eòand-man at the Women's Skiôle Aìey at the
back of the Tailor's Arms in Casterbridge. 'Twas a
hoòible sinful situation, and a very curious place for a
gïd man. I had to stand and lïk ba'dy people in
the face from morning tiì night; but 'twas no use ­ I
was just as-bad as ever after aì. Blushes hev bån
in the family for generations. There, 'tis a haðy pro+
vidence that I be no worse.'
" True,' said Jacob Smaìbury, dåpening his thoughts
to a profounder view of the subject. "'Tis a thought
to lïk at, that ye might have bån worse; but even
as you be, 'tis a very bad aæliction for 'å, Joseph. For
ye så, shepherd, though 'tis very weì for a woman,
dang it aì, 'tis awkward for a man like him, pïr
feìer ? '
" 'Tis ­ 'tis,' said Gabriel, recovering from a medita+
tion. " Yes, very awkward for the man.'
" Ay, and he's very timid, tï,' observed Jan Coçan.
"Once he had bån working late at Yalbury Boôom,
and had had a drap of drink, and lost his way as he was
coming home-along through Yalbury Wïd, didn't ye,
Master Pïrgraó ? '
" No, no, no ; not that story !' expostulated the
modest man, forcing a laugh to bury his concern.
<P 108>
" ­ ­ And so 'a lost himself quite,' continued Mr
Coçan, with an impaóive face, implying that a true
naòative, like time and tide, must run its course and
would respect no man. "And as he was coming along
in the miäle of the night, much afeared, and not able
to find his way out of the trås nohow, 'a cried out,
" Man-a-lost!. man-a-lost !." A owl in a trå haðened
to be crying "Whï-whï-whï !" as owls do, you
know, shepherd ' (Gabriel noäed), " and Joseph, aì
in a tremble, said, " Joseph Pïrgraó, of Weatherbury,
sir.!"
"No, no, now ­ that's tï much! ' said the timid
man, becoming a man of brazen courage aì of a suäen.
"I didn't say sir. I'ì tike my oath I didn't say " Joseph
Pïrgraó o' Weatherbury, sir." No, no ; what's right
is right, and I never said sir to the bird, knowing very
weì that no man of a gentleman's rank would be
hoìering there at that time o' night. " Joseph Pïr+
graó of Weatherbury," ­ that's every word I said, and
I shouldn't ha' said that if 't hadn't bån for Kåper
Day's metheglin® There, 'twas a merciful thing it
ended where it did.'
The question of which was right being tacitly waived
by the company, Jan went on meditatively : ­
"And he's the fearfuìest man, bain't ye, Joseph?
Ay, another time ye were lost by Lambing-Down Gate,
weren't ye, Joseph ? '
"I was,' replied Pïrgraó, as if there were some
conditions tï serious even for modesty to remember
itself under, this being one.
' Yes ; that were the miäle of the night, tï. The
gate would not open, try how he would, and knowing
there was the Devil's hand in it, he knåled down.'
'Ay,' said Joseph, acquiring confidence from the
warmth of the fire, the cider, and a perception of the
naòative capabilities of the experience aìuded to.
" My heart died within me, that time; but I knåled
down and said the Lord's Prayer, and then the Belie
THE CHAT
right through, and then the Ten Coíandments, in
earnest prayer. But no, the gate wouldn't open; and
then I went on with Dearly Beloved Brethren, and,
thinks I, this makes four, and 'tis aì I know out of
bïk, and if this don't do it nothing wiì, and I'm a
lost man. Weì, when I got to
<P 109>
Saying After Me, I
rose from my knås and found the gate would open
 ­ yes, neighbours, the gate opened the same as ever.'
 A meditation on the obvious inference wsas indulged
in by aì, and during its continuance each directed his
vision into the ashpit, which glowed like a desert in
the tropics under a vertical sun, shaping their eyes long
and liny, partly because of the light, partly from the
depth of the subject discuóed.
 Gabriel broke the silence. "What sort of a place
is this to live at, and what sort of a mis'eó is she to
work under?' Gabriel's bosom thriìed gently as he
thus sliðed under the notice of the aóembly the iîer+
most subject of his heart.
 "We d' know liôle of her ­ nothing. She only
showed herself a few days ago. Her uncle was tïk
bad, and the doctor was caìed with his world-wide
skiì; but he couldn't save the man. As I take it,
she's going to kåp on the farm.
 "That's abouyt the shape o't, 'a b'lieve,' said Jan
uncle was a very fair sort of man. Did ye know en,
be under 'em as under one here and there. Her
uncle was a very fair sort of man. Did ye know 'en,
shepherd ­ a bachelor-man ? '
 "Not at aì.'
 "I used to go to his house a-courting my first wife,
Charloôe, who was his dairymaid. Weì, a very gïd+
hearted man were Farmer Everdene, and I being a
respectable young feìow was aìowed to caì and så
her and drink as much ale as I liked, but not to caòy
away any ­ outside my skin I mane of course.'
 "Ay, ay, Jan Coçan; we know yer maning.'
 "And so you så 'twas beautiful ale, and I wished
to value his kindneó as much as I could, and not to
be so iì-maîered as to drink only a thimbleful, which
would have bån insulting the man's generosity ­ ­ '
 "True, Master Coçan, 'twould so,' coòoborated
Mark Clark.
 " ­ ­ And so I used to eat a lot of salt fish afore
going, and then by the time I got there I were as dry
as a lime-basket ­ so thorough dry that that ale would
slip down ­ ah, 'twould slip down swåt! Haðy
times! heavenly times! Such lovely drunks as I
used to have at that house! You can mind, Jacob?
You used to go wi' me sometimes.'
<P ±0>
 "I can ­ I can,' said Jacob. "That one, tï, that
we had at Buck's Head on a White Monday was a
preôy tiðle.'
 "'Twas. But for a wet of the beôer claó, that
brought you no nearer to the horned man than you were
afore you begun, there was none like those in Farmer
Everdene's kitchen. Not a single damn aìowed; no,
not a bare pïr one, even at the most chårful moment
when aì were blindest, though the gïd old word of
sin thrown in here and there at such times is a great
relief to a meòy soul.'
 "True,' said the maltster. "Nater requires her
swearing at the regular times, or she's not herself; and
unholy exclamations is a neceóity of life.'
 "But Charloôe,' continued Coçan ­ "not a word of
the sort would Charloôe aìow, nor the smaìest item of
taking in vain® Ay, pïr Charloôe, I wonder if she
had the gïd fortune to get into Heaven when 'a died!.
But 'a was never much in luck's way, and perhaps 'a
went downwards after aì, pïr soul.'
 "And did any of you know Mió Everdene's-father
and mother?' inquired the shepherd, who found some
diæiculty in kåping the conversation in the desired
chaîel.
THE CHAT
 "I knew them a liôle,' said Jacob Smaìbury; "but
they were townsfolk, and didn't live here. They've
bån dead for years. Father, what sort of people were
mis'eó' father and mother?'
 "Weì,' said the maltster, "he wasn't much to lïk
at; but she was a lovely woman. He was fond enough
of her as his swåtheart.'
 "Used to kió her scores and long-hundreds o times,
so 'twas said,' observed Coçan.
 "He was very proud of her, tï, when they were
maòied, as I've bån told,' said the maltster.
 "Ay,' said Coçan. "He admired her so much that
he used to light the candle thrå time a night to lïk
at her.'
 "Boundleó love; I shouldn't have suðosed it in the
universe!' murmered Joseph Pïrgraó, who habituaìy
spoke on a large scale in his moral reflections.
 "Weì, to be sure,' said Gabriel.
 "Oh, 'tis true enough. I knowed the man and
woman both weì. Levi Everdene ­ that was the man's
name, sure. ¢Man,§
<P ±>
saith I in my huòy, but he were
of a higher circle of life than that ­ 'a was a gentleman+
tailor reaìy, worth scores of pounds. And he became
a very celebrated bankrupt two or thrå times.'
 "Oh, I thought he was quite a coíon man!.' said
Joseph.
 "O no, no! That man failed for heaps of money;
hundreds in gold and silver.'
 The maltster being rather short of breath, Mr. Coçan,
after absently scrutinising a coal which had faìen among
the ashes, tïk up the naòative, with a private twirl of
his eye: ­
 "Weì, now, you'd hardly believe it, but that man ­
husbands alive, after a while. Understand' 'a didn't
want to be fickle, but he couldn't help it. The pïr
feìer were faithful and true enough to her in his wish,
but his heart would rove, do what he would. He spoke
to me in real tribulation about it once. ¢Coçan,§
he said, ¢I could never wish for a handsomer woman
than I've got, but fåling she's ticketed as my lawful
wife, I can't help my wicked heart wandering, do what
I wiì.§ But at last I believe he cured it by making her
take oæ her weäing-ring and caìing her by her maiden
name as they sat together after the shop was shut, and
so 'a would get to fancy she was only his swåtheart, and
not maòied to him at aì. And as sïn as he could
thoroughly fancy he was doing wrong and coíiôing
the seventh, 'a got to like her as weì as ever, and they
lived on a perfect picture of mutel love.'
 "Weì, 'twas a most ungodly remedy,' murmured
Joseph Pïrgraó; "but we ought to fål dåp chårful+
neó that a 'haðy Providence kept it from being any
worse. You så, he might have gone the bad road and
given his eyes to unlawfulneó entirely ­ yes, groó un+
lawfulneó, so to say it.'
 "You så,' said Biìy Smaìbury, "The man's wiì was
to do right, sure enough, but his heart didn't chime in.'
 "He got so much beôer, that he was quite godly
in his later years, wasn't he, Jan ?' said Joseph Pïr+
graó. "He got himself confirmed over again in a more
serious way, and tïk to saying ¢Amen§ almost as loud
as the clerk, and he liked to copy comforting verses
from the tombstones. He used, tï, to hold the money+
plate at Let Your Light so Shine, and stand
<P ±2>
godfather
to pïr liôle come-by-chance children; and he kept a
mióionary' box upon his table to nab folks unawares
when they caìed; yes, and he would-box the charity+
boys' ears, if they laughed in church, tiì they could
hardly stand upright, and do other dåds of piety
natural to the saintly inclined.'
 "Ay, at that time he thought of nothing but high
things,' aäed Biìy Smaìbury. "One day Parson Thirdly
met him and said, ¢Gïd-Morning, Mister Everdene; 'tis
THE CHAT
a fine day!§ ¢Amen§ said Everdene, quite absent+
like, thinking only of religion when he såd a parson+
 "Their daughter was not at aì a preôy chiel at that
time,' said Henery Fray. "Never should have. thought
she'd have growed up such a handsome body as she is.'
 "'Tis to be hoped her temper is as gïd as her face.'
 "Weì, yes; but the baily wiì have most to do with
the busineó and ourselves. Ah!' Henery gazed into
the ashpit, and smiled volumes of ironical knowledge.
 "A quår Christian, like the Devil's head in a cowl,
 "He is,' said Henery, implying that irony must cease
at a certain point. "Betwån we two, man and man, I
believe that man would as sïn teì a lie Sundays as
working-days ­ that I do so.'
 "Gïd faith, you do talk!' said Gabriel.
 "True enough,' said the man of biôer mïds, lïking
round upon the company with the antithetic laughter
that comes from a kåner aðreciation of the miseries
of life than ordinary men are capable of. 'Ah, there's
people of one sort, and people of another, but that man
 ­ bleó your souls!'
 Gabriel thought fit to change the subject. "You
must be a very aged man, malter, to have sons growed
mild and ancient' he remarked.
 "Father's so old that 'a can't mind his age, can ye,
father?' interposed Jacob. "And he growled teòible
crïked tï, lately' Jacob continued, surveying his
father's figure, which
<P ±3>
was rather more bowed than his own.
"Reaìy one may say that father there is thrå-double.'
 "Crïked folk wiì last a long while,' said the maltster,
grimly, and not in the best humour.
 "Shepherd would like to hear the pedigrå of yer
life, father ­ wouldn't ye, shepherd ?
 "Ay that I should,' said Gabriel with the heartineó
of a man who had longed to hear it for several months.
"What may your age be, malter?'
 The maltster cleared his throat in an exaçerated
form for emphasis, and elongating his gaze to the
remotest point of the ashpit! said, in the slow spåch
justifiable when the importance of a subject is so
generaìy felt that any maîerism must be tolerated
in geôing at it, "Weì, I don't mind the year I were
born in, but perhaps I can reckon up the places I've
lived at, and so get it that way. I bode at Uðer Long+
puäle acroó there' (noäing to the north) "tiì I were
eleven. I bode seven at Kingsbere' (noäing to the
east) "where I tïk to malting. I went therefrom to
Norcombe, and malted there two-and-twenty years, and+
two-and-twenty years I was there turnip-hoeing and
harvesting. Ah, I knowed that old place, Norcombe,
years afore you were thought of, Master Oak' (Oak smiled
sincere belief in the fact). "Then I malted at Dur+
nover four year, and four year turnip-hoeing; and
I was fourtån times eleven months at Miìpond St.
Jude's ' (noäing north-west-by-north). "Old Twiìs
wouldn't hire me for more than eleven months at a
time, to kåp me from being chargeable to the parish
if so be I was disabled. Then I was thrå year at
Meìstock, and I've bån here one-and-thirty year come
Candlemas. How much is that?"
 "Hundred and seventån,' chuckled another old
gentleman, given to mental arithmetic and liôle con+
versation, who had hitherto sat unobserved in a corner.
 "Weì, then, that's my age,' said the maltster, em+
phaticaìy.
 "O no, father!' said Jacob. "Your turnip-hoeing
were in the suíer and your malting in the winter of
the same years, and ye don't ought to count-both halves
father.'
<P ±4>
 "Chok' it aì! I lived through the suíers, didn't
I? That's my question. I suðose ye'ì say next I be
no age at aì to speak of?'
 "Sure we shan't,' said Gabriel, sïthingly.
 "Ye be a very old aged person, malter,' aôested Jan
must have a wonderful talented constitution to be able
to live so long, mustn't he, neighbours?'
 "True, true; ye must, malter, wonderful;' said the
måting unanimously.
 The maltster, being know pacified, was even generous
enough to voluntarily disparage in a slight degrå the
virtue of having lived a great many years, by mentioning
that the cup they were drinking out of was thrå years
older than he.
 While the cup was being examined, the end of
Gabriel Oak's flute became visible over his smock-frock
I såd you blowing into a great flute by now at Caster+
bridge?'
 "You did,' said Gabriel, blushingh faintly. "I've bån
in great trouble, neighbours, and was driven to it.
take it careleó-like, shepherd and your time wiì come
tired?'
 "Neither drum nor trumpet have I heard since
Christmas,' said Jan Coçan. "Come, raise a tune,
Master Oak!'
 "That I wiì,' said Gabriel, puìing out his flute and
puôing it together. "A pïr tïl, neighbours; but
such as I can do ye shaì have and welcome.'
 Oak then struck up "Jockey to the Fair,' and played
that sparkling melody thrå times through aãenting the
notes in the third round in a most artistic and lively
maîer by bending his body in smaì jerks and taðing
with his fït to beat time.
 "He can blow the flute very weì ­ that 'a can,' said
a young maòied man, who having no individuality worth
mentioning was known as "Susan Taì's husband.' He
continued, "I'd as lief as not be able to blow into a
flute as weì-as that.'
<P ±5>
 "He's a clever man, and 'tis a true comfort for us to
have such a shepherd,' murmured Joseph Pïrgraó, in
a soft cadence. "We ought to fål fuì o' thanksgiving
that he's not a player of ba'dy songs 'instead of these
meòy tunes; for 'twould have bån just as easy for God
to have made the shepherd a lïse low man ­ a man of
iniquity, so to speak it ­ as what he is. Yes, for our wives'
and daughters' sakes we should fål real thanks giving.'
 "True, true, ­ real thanksgiving!' dashed in Mark
Clark conclusively, not fåling it to be of any conse+
quence to his opinion that he had only heard about a
word and thrå-quarters of what Joseph had said.
 "Yes,' aäed Joseph, begiîing to fål like a man in
the Bible; "for evil do thrive so in these times that ye
may be as much deceived in the clanest shaved and
whitest shirted man as in the raçedest tramp upon the
turnpike, if I may term it so.'
 "Ay, I can mind yer face now, shepherd,' said
Henery Fray, criticising Gabriel with misty eyes as he
entered upon his second tune. "Yes ­ now I så 'å
blowing into the flute I know 'å to be the same man
I så play at Casterbridge, for yer mouth were scrimped
up and yer eyes a-staring out like a strangled man's ­
just as they be now.'
 "'Tis a pity that playing the flute should make a man
lïk such a scarecrow,' observed Mr. Mark Clark, with
aäitional criticism of Gabriel's countenance, the laôer
person jerking out, with the ghastly grimace required by
the instrument, the chorus of "Dame Durden!
 "I hope you don't mind that young man's bad
maîers in naming your features?' whispered Joseph to
Gabriel.
 "Not at aì,' said Mr. Oak.
 "For by nature ye be a very handsome man,
shepherd,' continued Joseph Pïrgraó, with wiîing
sauvity.
 "Ay, that ye be, shepard,' said the company.
 "Thank you very much,' said Oak, in the modest
tone gïd
<P ±6>
maîers demanded, thinking, however, that
he would never let Bathsheba så him playing the
flute; in this severe showing s discretion equal to that
related to its sagacious inventreó, the divine Minerva
herself.
 "Ah, when I and my wife were maòied at Norcombe
Church,' said the old maltster, not pleased at finding
himself left out of the subject "we were caìed the
handsomest couple in the neighbourhïd ­ everybody
said so.'
 "Danged if ye bain't altered now, malter,' said a voice
with the vigour natural to the enunciation of a remark+
ably evident truism. It came from the old man in the
background, whose oæensiveneó and spiteful ways were
barely atoned for by the oãasional chuckle he con+
tributed to general laughs.
 "O no, no,' said Gabriel.
 "Don't ye play no more shepherd ' said Susan Taì's
husband, the young maòied man who had spoken once
before. "I must be moving and when there's tunes
going on I såm as if hung in wires. If I thought after
I'd left that music was stiì playing, and I not there, I
should be quite melancholy-like.'
 "What's yer huòy then, Laban?' inquired Coçan+
"You used to bide as late as the latest.'
 "Weì, ye så, neighbours, I was lately maòied to a
woman, and she's my vocation now, and so ye så ­ ­ '
The young man hated lamely.
 "New Lords new laws, as the saying is, I suðose,'
remarked Coçan.
 "Ay, 'a b'lieve ­ ha, ha!' said Susan Taì's husband,
in a tone intended to imply his habitual reception of
jokes without minding them at aì. The young man
then wished them gïd-night and withdrew.
 Henery Fray was the first to foìow. Then Gabriel
arose and went oæ with Jan Coçan, who had oæered
him a lodging. A few minutes later, when the remaining
ones were on their legs and about to depart, Fray came
back again in a huòy. Flourishing his finger ominously
he threw a gaze tåming with tidings just ­ where his eye
alighted by aãident, which haðened to be in Joseph
Pïrgraó's face.
<P ±7>
 "O ­ what's the maôer, what's the maôer, Henery?'
said Joseph, starting back.
 "What's a-brewing, Henrey?' asked Jacob and Mark
Clark.
 "Baily Peîyways ­ Baily Peîyways ­ I said so; yes,
I said so!'
 "What, found out stealing anything?'
 "Stealing it is. The news is, that after Mió
Everdene got home she went out again to så aì was
safe, as she usuaìy do, and coming in found Baily
Peîyways cråping down the granary steps with half a
a bushel of barley. She flåd at him like a cat ­ never
such a tomboy as she is ­ of course I speak with closed
dïrs?'
 "You do ­ you do, Henery.'
 "She flåd at him, and, to cut a long story short,
he owned to having caòied oæ five sack altogether, upon
her promising not to persecute him. Weì, he's turned
out neck and crop, and my question is, who's going to
be baily now?'
 The question was such a profound one that Henery
was obliged to drink there and then from the large
cup tiì the boôom was distinctly visible inside. Before
he had replaced it on the table, in came the young man,
Susan Taì's husband, in a stiì greater huòy.
 "Have ye heard the news that's aì over parish?'
 "About Baily Peîyways?'
 "But besides that?'
 "No ­ not a morsel of it!' they replied, lïking into
the very midst of Laban Taì as if to måt his words
half-way down his throat.
 "What a night of hoòors!' murmured Joseph Pïr+
graó, waving his hands spasmodicaìy. "I've had the
news-beì ringing in my left ear quite bad enough for a
murder, and I've sån a magpie aì alone!'
 "Faîy Robin ­ Mió everdene's youngest servant ­
can't be found. They've bån wanting to lock up the
dïr these two hours, but she isn't come in. And they
don't know what to do about going to hed for fear of
locking her out. They wouldn't be so concerned if she
hadn't bån noticed in such low spirits
<P ±8>
these last few
days, and Maryaî d'think the begiîing of a crowner's
inquest has haðened to the pïr girl.'
 "O ­ 'tis burned ­ 'tis burned!' came from Joseph
Pïrgraó's dry lips.
 "No ­ 'tis drowned!' said 'Taì.
 "Or 'tis her father's razor!' suçested Biìy Smaìbury,
with a vivid sense of detail.
 "Weì ­ Mió Everdene wants to speak to one or two
of us before we go to bed. What with this trouble about
the baily, and now about the girl, mis'eó is almost wild.'
 They aì hastened up the lane to the farmhouse,
excepting the old maltster, whom neither news, fire,
rain, nor thunder could draw from his hole. There, as
the others' fïtsteps died away he sat down again and
continued gazing as usual into the furnace with his red,
bleared eyes.
 From the bedrïm window above their heads Bath+
sheba's head and shoulders, robed in mystic white, were
dimly sån extended into the air.
 "Are any of my men among you?' she said anxiously.
 "Yes, ma'am, several,' said Susan Taì's husband.
 "Tomoòow morning I wish two or thrå of you to
make inquiries in the viìages round if they have sån
such a person as Faîy Robin. Do it quietly; there is
no reason for alarm as yet. She must have left whilst
we were aì at the fire.'
 "I beg yer pardon, but had she any young man court+
ing her in the parish, ma'am?" asked Jacob Smaìbury.
 "I don't know,' said Bathsheba.
 "I've never heard of any such thing, ma'am,' said
two or thrå.
 "It is hardly likely, either,' continued Bathsheba.
"For any lover of hers might have come to the house if
he had bån a respectable lad. The most mysterious
maôer coîected with her absence ­ indåd, the only
thing which gives me serious alarm ­ is that she was
sån to go out of the house by Maryaî with only her
indïr working gown on ­ not even a boîet.'
 "And you mean, ma'am, excusing my words, that a
young
<P ±9>
woman would hardly go to så her young man
without dreóing up,' said Jacob, turning his mental
vision upon past experiences. "That's true ­ she would
not, ma'am.'
 "She had, I think, a bundle, though I couldn't så
very weì,' said a female voice from another window,
which såmed that of Maryaî. "But she had no
young man about here. Hers lives in Casterbridge, and
I believe he's a soldier.'
 "Do you know his name?' Bathsheba said.
 "No, mistreó; she was very close about it.'
 "Perhaps I might be able to find out if I went to
Casterbridge baòacks,' said Wiìiam Smaìbury.
 "Very weì; if she doesn't return tomoòow, mind
you go there and try to discover which man it is, and
så him. I fål more responsible than I should if she
had had any friends or relations alive. I do hope she
has come to no harm through a man of that kind®
And then there's this disgraceful aæair of the bailiæ ­
but I can't speak of him now.'
 Bathsheba had so many reasons for uneasineó that
it såmed she did not think it worth while to dweì
upon any particular one. "Do as I told you, then'
she said in conclusion, closing the casement.
 "Ay, ay, mistreó; we wiì,' they replied, and moved
away.
 That night at Coçan's, Gabriel Oak, beneath the
scrån of closed eyelids, was busy with fancies, and fuì
of movement, like a river flowing rapidly under its ice.
Night had always bån the time at which he saw Bath+
sheba most vividly, and through the slow hours of
shadow he tenderly regarded her image now. It is
rarely that the pleasures of the imagination wiì compen+
sate for the pain of slåpleóneó, but they poóibly did
with Oak to-night, for the delight of merely såing her
eæaced for the time his perception of the great diæer+
ence betwån såing and poóeóing.
 He also thought of Plans for fetching his few utensils
and bïks from Norcombe. The Young Man's Best
Companion, The Faòier's Sure Guide, The Veterinary
Surgeon, Paradise Lost, The Pilgrim's Progreó, Robinson
Crusoe, Ash's Dictionary, the Walkingame's Arithmetic,
constituted his library;
<P 120>
and though a limited series, it was
one from which he had acquired more sound informa+
tion by diligent perusal than many a man of oðortunities
has done from a furlong of laden shelves.
<C ix>
<P 121>
THE HOMESTEAD ­ A VISITOR ­ HALF-CONFIDENCES
By daylight, the Bower of Oak's new-found mistreó,
Bathsheba Everdene, presented itself as a hoary build+
ing, of the early stage of Claóic Renaióance as regards
its architecture, and of 'a proportion which told at a
glance that, as is so frequently the case, it had once
bån the memorial haì upon a smaì estate around it,
now altogether eæaced as a distinct property, and merged
in the vast tract of a non-resident landlord, which com+
prised several such modest demesnes.
 Fluted pilasters, worked from the solid stone,
decorated its front, and above the rïf the chimneys
were paneìed or columnar, some coped gables with
finials and like features stiì retaining traces of their
Gothic extraction. Soft Brown moóes, like faded
velvetån, formed cushions upon the stone tiling, and
tufts of the houselåk or sengrån sprouted from the
eaves of the low suòounding buildings. A gravel walk
leading from the dïr to the road in front was encrusted
at the sides with more moó ­ here it was a silver-grån
variety, the nut-brown of the gravel being visible to the
width of only a fït or two in the centre. This circum+
stance, and the generaìy slåpy air of the whole prospect
here, together with the animated and contrasting state
of the reverse facade, suçested to the imagination that
on the adaptation of the building for farming purposes
the vital principle' of the house had turned round inside
its body to face the other way. Reversals of this kind,
strange deformities, tremendous paralyses, are often sån
to be inflicted by trade upon edifices ­ either individual
or in the açregate as stråts and towns ­ which were
originaìy plaîed for pleasure alone.
 Lively voices were heard this morning in the uðer
rïms, the main staircase to which was of hard oak, the
balusters, heavy as bed-posts, being turned and moulded
in the quaint
<P 1²>
fashion of their century, the handrail as
stout as a parapet-top, and the stairs themselves con+
tinuaìy twisting round like a person trying to lïk over
his shoulder. Going up, the flïrs above were found
to have a very iòegular surface, rising to ridges, sinking
into vaìey; and being just then uncarpeted, the face
of the boards was sån to be eaten into iîumerable
the opening and shuôing of every dïr a tremble
foìowed every bustling movement, and a creak aãom+
panied a walker about the house like a spirit, wherever+
he went.
 In the rïm from which the conversation procåded,
Bathsheba and her servant-companion, Liäy Smaì+
bury were to be discovered siôing upon the flïr, and
sorting a complication of papers, bïks, boôles, and
ruâish spread out thereon ­ remnants from the house+
hold stores of the late oãupier. Liäy, the maltster's
great-granäaughter, was about Bathsheba's equal in
age, and her face was a prominent advertisement of the
features' might have lacked in form was amply made up
for by perfection of hue, which at this winter-time was
the softened ruäineó on a surface of high rotundity
and, like the presentations of those great colourists, it
was a face which kept weì back from the boundary
betwån comelineó and the ideal. Though elastic in
nature she was leó daring than Bathsheba, and oãa+
sionaìy showed some earnestneó, which consisted half
of genuine fåling, and half of maîerlineó superaäed
by way of duty.
 Through a partly-opened dïr the noise of a scruâing+
brush led up to the charwoman, Maryaî Money, a person
who for a face had a circular disc, fuòowed leó by age
than by long gazes of perplexity at distant objects. To
think of her was to get gïd-humoured; to speak of
her was to raise the image of a dried Normandy
piðin.
 "Stop your scruâing a moment,' said Bathsheba
through the dïr to her. "I hear something.'
 Maryaî suspended the brush.
<P 123>
 The tramp of a horse was aðarent, aðroaching the
front of the building. The paces slackened, turned in
at the wicket, and, what was most unusual, came up
the moóy path close to the dïr. The dïr was
taðed with the end of a crop or stick.
 "What impertinence!' said Liäy, in a low voice.
"To ride up the fïtpath like that! Why didn't he
stop at the gate? Lord! "tis a gentleman! I så the
top of his hat.'
 "Be quiet!' said Bathsheba.
 The further expreóion of Liäy's concern was con+
tinued by aspect instead of naòative.
 "Why doesn't Mrs. Coçan go to the dïr?' Bath+
sheba continued.
 Rat-tat-tat-tat, resounded more decisively from Bath+
sheba's oak.
 "Maryaî, you go!' said she, fluôering under the
onset ot a crowd of romantic poóibilities.
 "O ma'am ­ så, here's a meó!'
 The argument was unanswerable after a glance at
Maryaî.
 "Liäy ­ you must,' said Bathsheba.
 Liäy held up her hands and arms, coated with dust
from the ruâish they were sorting, and lïked implor+
ingly at her mistreó.
 "There ­ -Mrs. Coçan is going!' said Bathsheba,
exhaling her relief in the form of a long breath which
had lain in her bosom a minute or more.
 The dïr opened, and a dåp voice said ­
 "Is Mió Everdene at home?'
 "I'ì så, sir,' said Mrs. Coçan, and in a minute
aðeared in the rïm.
 "Dear, what a thirtover place this world is!' con+
tinued Mrs. Coçan (a wholesome-lïking lady who
had a voice for each claó of remark aãording to the
emotion involved; who could toó a pancake or twirl
a mop with the aãuracy of pure mathematics, and
who at this moment showed hands shaçy with frag+
ments of dough and arms encrusted with flour). "I
am never up to my elbows, Mió, in making a puäing
but one of two things do haðen ­ either my nose must
nåds begin
<P 124>
tickling, and I can't live without scratching
 A woman's dreó being a part of her countenance,
and any disorder in the one being of the same nature
with a malformation or wound in the other, Bathsheba
said at once ­
 "I can't så him in this state. Whatever shaì I do?'
 Not-at-homes were hardly naturalized in Weatherbury
farmhouses, so Liäy suçested ­ "Say you're a fright
with dust, and can't come down.'
 "Yes ­ that sounds very weì,' said Mrs. Coçan,
criticaìy.
 "Say I can't så him ­ that wiì do.'
 Mrs. Coçan went downstairs, and returned the
answer as requested, aäing, however, on her own
responsibility, "Mió is dusting boôles, sir, and is quite
a object ­ that's why 'tis.'
 "Oh, very weì,' said the dåp voice,' indiæerently.
"Aì I wanted to ask was, if anything had bån heard
of Faîy Robin?'
 "Nothing, sir ­ but we may know to-night. Wiìiam
Smaìbury is gone to Casterbridge, where her young
man lives, as is suðosed, and the other men be inquir+
ing about everywhere.'
 The horse's tramp then recoíenced and -retreated,
and the dïr closed.
 "Who is Mr. Boldwïd?' said Bathsheba.
 "A gentleman-farmer at Liôle Weatherbury.'
 "Maòied?'
 "No, mió.'
 "How old is he?'
 "Forty, I should say ­ very handsome ­ rather stern+
lïking ­ and rich.'
 "What a bother this dusting is! I am always in
some unfortunate plight or other;' Bathsheba said,
complainingly. "Why should he inquire aboat Faîy?'
 "Oh, because, as she had no friends in her childhïd,
he tïk her and put her to schïl, and got her her
place here under your uncle. He's a very kind man
that way, but Lord ­ there!'
 "What?'
 "Never was such a hopeleó man for a woman!
He's bån
<P 125>
courted by sixes and sevens ­ aì the girls,
gentle and simple, for miles round, have tried him. Jane
Perkins worked at him for two months like a slave,
and the two Mió Taylors spent a year upon him,
and he cost Farmer Ives's daughter nights of tears
and twenty pounds' worth of new clothes; but Lord ­
the money might as weì have bån thrown out of the
window.'
 A liôle boy came up at this moment and lïked in
upon them. This child was one of the Coçans who,
with the Smaìburys, were as coíon among the
families of this district as the Avons and Derwents
among our rivers. He always had a lïsened tïth or
a cut finger to show to particular friends, which he did
with an air of being thereby elevated above the coíon
herd of aælictionleó humanity ­ to which exhibition
of congratulation as weì as pity.
 "I've got a pen-nå!' said Master Coçan in a
scaîing measure.
 "Weì ­ who gave it you, Teäy?' said Liäy.
 "Mis-teò Bold-wïd! He gave it to me for opening
the gate.'
 "What did he say?'
 "He said "Where are you going, my liôle man?§
and I said, "To Mió Everdene's please;§ and he said,
"She is a staid woman, isn't she, my liôle man?' and
I said, ¢Yes.§
 "You naughty child! What did you say that for?'
 "Cause he gave me the peîy!'
 "What a pucker evrything is in!' said Bathsheba,
discontentedly when the child had gone. 'Get away,
thing! You ought to be maòied by this time, and not
here troubling me!'
 "Ay, mistreó ­ so I did. But what betwån the pïr
men I won't have, and the rich men who won't have me,
I stand as a pelicon in the wilderneó!'
 "Did anybody ever want to maòy you mió?' Liäy
ventured to ask when they were again alone. "Lots of
'em, i daresay.?'
 Bathsheba paused, as if about to refuse a reply, but
the temptation to say yes, since it was reaìy in her
power was iòesistible by aspiring virginity, in spite of
her splån at having bån published as old.
<P 126>
 "A man wanted to once,' she said, in a highly experi+
enced tone and the image of Gabriel Oak, as the farmer,
rose before her.
 "How nice it must såm!' said Liäy, with the fixed
features of mental realization. "And you wouldn't have
him?'
 "He wasn't quite gïd enough for me.'
 "How swåt to be able to disdain, when most of us
are glad to say, ¢Thank you!§ I såm I hear it.
¢No, sir ­ I'm your beôer,§ or ¢Kió my fït, sir; my
face is for mouths of consequence.§ And did you love
him, mió?'
 "Oh, no. But I rather liked him.'
 "Do you now?'
 "Of course not ­ what fïtsteps are those I hear?'
 Liäy lïked from a back window into the courtyard
behind, which was now geôing low-toned and dim with
the earliest films of night. A crïked file of men was
aðroaching the back dïr. The whole string of trailing
individuals advanced in the completest balance of inten+
tion, like the remarkable creatures known as Chain
Salpae, which, distinctly organized in other respects, have
one wiì coíon to a whole family. Some were, as
usual, in snow-white smock-frocks of Ruóia duck, and
some in whitey-brown ones of draâet ­ marked on the
wrists, breasts, backs, and slåves with honeycomb-work.
Two or thrå womcn in paôens brought up the rear.
 "The Philistines be upon us,' said Liäy, making her
nose white against the glaó.
 "Oh, very weì. Maryaî, go down and kåp them
in the kitchen tiì I am dreóed, and then show them in
to me in the haì.'
<C x>
<P 127>
HALF-AN-HOUR later Bathsheba, in finished dreó,
and foìowed by Liäy, entered the uðer end of the old
haì to find that her men had aì deposited themselves on
a long form and a seôle at the lower extremity. She sat
down at a table and opened th e time-bïk, pen in her
hand, with a canvas money-bag beside her. From this
she poured a smaì heap of coin. Liäy chose a
position at her elbow and began to sew, sometimes
pausing and lïking round, or with the air of a privileged
person, taking up one of the half-sovereigns lying before
her and surveying it merely as a work of art, while
strictly preventing her countenance from expreóing any
wish to poóeó it as money.
 "Now before I begin, men,' said Bathsheba, "I have
two maôers to speak of. The first is that the bailiæ is
dismióed for thieving, and that I have formed a resolu+
tion to have no bailiæ at aì, but to manage everything
with my own head and hands.'
 The men breathed an audible breath of amazement.
 "The next maôer is, have you heard anything of
Faîy?'
 "Nothing, ma'am.
 "Have you done anything?'
 "I met Farmer Boldwïd,' said Jacob Smaìbury, 'and
I went with him and two of his men, and draçed New+
miì Pond, but we found nothing.'
 "And the new shepherd have bån to Buck's Head,
by Yalbury, thinking she had gone there, but nobody
had såd her,' said Laban Taì.
 "Hasn't Wiìiam Smaìbury bån to Casterbridge?'
 "Yes, ma'am, but he's not yet come home. He
promised to be back by six.'
 "It wants a quarter to six at present,' said Bathsheba,
 
<P 128>
lïking at her watch. "I daresay he'ì be in directly.
Weì, now then' ­ she lïked into the bïk ­ "Joseph
Pïrgraó, are you there?'
 "Yes, sir ­ ma'am I mane,' said the person aäreóed.
"I be the personal name of Pïrgraó.'
 "And what are you?'
 "Nothing in my own eye. In the eye of other people
 ­ weì, I don't say it; though public thought wiì out.'
 "What do you do on the farm?'
 "I do do carting things aì the year, and in såd time I
shïts the rïks and spaòows, and helps at pig-kiìing, sir.'
 "How much to you ?'
 "Please nine and ninepence and a gïd halfpeîy
where 'twas a bad one, sir ­ ma'am I mane.'
 "Quite coòect. Now here are ten shiìings in aäi+
tion as a smaì present, as I am a new comer.'
 Bathsheba blushed slightly at the sense of being
generous in public, and Henery Fray, who had drawn
up towards her chair, lifted his eyebrows and fingers to
expreó amazement on a smaì scale.
 "How much do I owe you ­ that man in the corner ­
what's your name?' continued Bathsheba.
 "Maôhew Mïn, ma'am,' said a singular framework of
clothes with nothing of any consequence inside them,
which advanced with the toes in no definite direction
forwards, but turned in or out as they chanced to swing.
 "Maôhew Mark, did you say? ­ speak out ­ I shaì
not hurt you,' inquired the young farmer, kindly.
 "Maôhew Mïn mem' said Henery Fray, coòect+
ingly, from behind her chair, to which point he had
edged himself.
 "Maôhew Mïn,' murmured Bathsheba, turning her
bright eyes to the bïk. "Ten and twopence halfpeîy
is the sum put down to you, I så?'
 "Yes, mis'eó,' said Maôhew, as the rustle of wind
among dead leaves.
 "Here it is and ten shiìings. Now -the next ­ Andrew
Randle, you are a new man, I hear. How come you to
leave your last farm?'
<P 129>
 "P-p-p-p-p-pl-pl-pl-pl-l-l-l-l-ease, ma'am, p-p-p-p-pl-pl+
pl-pl-please, ma'am-please'm-please'm ­ ­ '
 "'A's a staíering man, mem,' said Henery Fray in
an undertone, "and they turned him away because the
only time he ever did speak plain he said his soul was
his own, and other iniquities, to the squire. "A can cuó,
mem, as weì as you or I, but 'a can't speak a coíon
spåch to save his life.'
 "Andrew Randle, here's yours ­ finish thanking me
in a day or two. Temperance Miìer ­ oh, here's another,
Soberneó ­ both women I suðose?'
 "Yes'm. Here we be, 'a b'lieve,' was echoed in shriì
unison.
 "What have you bån doing?'
 "Tending thrashing-machine and wimbling haybonds,
and saying ¢Hïsh!§ to the cocks and hens when they
go upon your såds and planting Early Flourbaìs and
Thompson's Wonderfuls with a diâle.'
 "Yes ­ I så. Are they satisfactory women?' she
inquired softly of Henery Fray.
 "O mem ­ don't ask me! Yeilding women?' as
scarlet a pair as ever was!' groaned Henery under his
breath.
 "Sit down.
 "Who, mem?'
 "Sit down,'
 Joseph Pïrgraó, in the background twitched, and
his lips became dry with fear of some teòible conse+
quences, as he saw Bathsheba suíarily speaking, and
Henery slinking oæ to a corner.
 "Now the next. Laban Taì, you'ì stay on working
for me?'
 "For you or anybody that pays me weì, ma'am,'
replied the young maòied man.
 "True ­ the man must live!' said a woman in the
back quarter, who had just entered with clicking paôens.
 "What woman is that?" Bathsheba asked.
 "I be his lawful wife!' continued the voice with
greater prominence of maîer and tone. This lady
caìed herself five-and-twenty, lïked thirty, paóed as
thirty-five, and was forty. She was a woman who never,
like some newly maòied, showed
<P 130>
conjugal tenderneó in
public, perhaps because she had none to show.
 "Oh, you are,' said Bathsheba. "Weì, Laban, wiì
you stay on ?'
 "Yes, he'ì stay, ma'am!' said again the shriì tongue
of Laban's lawful wife.
 "Weì, he can speak for himself, I suðose.'
 "O Lord, not he, ma'am! A simple tïl. Weì
enough, but a pïr gawkhaíer mortal,' the wife replied
 "Heh-heh-heh!' laughed the maòied man with a
hideous eæort of aðreciation, for he was as iòepreóibly
gïd-humoured under ghastly snubs as a parliamentary
candidate on the hustings.
 The names remaining were caìed in the same
maîer.
 "Now I think I have done with you,' said Bathsheba,
closing the bïk and shaking back a stray twine of hair.
"Has Wiìiam Smaìbury returned?'
 "No, ma'am.'
 "The new shepherd wiì want a man under him,'
suçested Henery Fray, trying to make himself oæicial
again by a sideway aðroach towards her chair.
 "Oh ­ he wiì. Who can he have?'
 "Young Cain Baì is a very gïd lad,' Henery said,
"and Shepherd Oak don't mind his youth?' he aäed,
turning with an apologetic smile to the shepherd, who
had just aðeared on the scene, and was now leaning
against the dïrpost with his arms folded.
 "No, I don't mind that,' said Gabriel.
 "How did Cain come by such a name?' asked
Bathsheba.
 "Oh you så, mem, his pore mother, not being a
Scripture-read woman made a mistake at his christening,
thinking 'twas Abel kiìed Cain, and caìed en Cain,
but 'twas tï late, for the name could never be got rid
of in the parish. "Tis very unfortunate for the boy.'
 "It is rather unfortunate.'
 "Yes. However, we soften it down as much as we
can, and caì him Cainey. Ah, pore widow-woman!
she cried her heart
<P 131>
out about it almost. She was
brought up by a very heathen father and mother, who
never sent her to church or schïl, and it shows how
the sins of the parents are visited upon the children,
mem.'
 Mr. Fray here drew up his features to the mild degrå
of melancholy required when the persons involved in
the given misfortune do not belong to your own family.
 "Very weì then, Cainey Baì to be under-shepherd
And you quite understand your duties? ­ you I mean,
Gabriel Oak?'
 "Quite weì, I thank you Mió Everdene,' said
Shepard Oak from the dïrpost. "If I don't, I'ì
inquire.' Gabriel was rather staçered by the remark+
able cïlneó of her maîer. Certainly nobody without
previous information would have dreamt that Oak and
the handsome woman before whom he stïd had ever
bån other than strangers. But perhaps her air was
the inevitable result of the social rise which had advanced
her from a coôage to a large house and fields. The
case is not unexampled in high places. When, in the
writings of the later poets, Jove and his family are found
to have moved from their cramped quarters on the peak
of Olympus into the wide sky above it, their words show
a proportionate increase of aòogance and reserve.
Fïtsteps were heard in the paóage, combining in
their character the qualities both of weight and measure,
rather at the expense of velocity.
(Aì.) 'Here's Biìy Smaìbury come from Caster+
bridge.'
' And what's the news ? ' said Bathsheba, as Wiìiam,
after marching to the miäle of the haì, tïk a hand+
kerchief from his hat and wiped his forehead from its
centre to its remoter boundaries.
'I should have bån sïner, mió,' he said, 'if it
hadn't bån for the weather.' He then stamped with
each fït severely, and on lïking down his bïts were
perceived to be cloçed with snow.
'Come at last, is it ?' said Henery.
" Weì, what about Faîy ? ' said Bathsheba.
"Weì, ma'am, in round numbers, she's run away with
the soldiers,' said Wiìiam.
<P 132>
" No; not a steady girl like Faîy ! '
"I'ì teì ye aì particulars. When I got to Caster,
bridge Baòacks, they said, " The Eleventh Dragïn+
Guards be gone away, and new trïps have come."
The Eleventh left last wåk for Melchester and onwards.
The Route came from Government like a thief in the
night, as is his nature to, and afore the Eleventh knew
it almost, they wem on the march. They paóed near
here.'
Gabriel had listened with interest. 'I saw them go,'
he said.
' Yes,' continued Wiìiam, ' they pranced down the
stråt playing "The Girl I Left Behind Me,' so 'tis
said, in glorious notes of triumph. Every lïker-on's
inside shïk with the blows of the great drum to his
dåpest vitals, and there was not a dry eye throughout
the town among the public-house people and the name+
leó women !.'
'But they're not gone to any war?'
'No, ma'am; but they be gone to take the places
of them who may, which is very close coîected. And
so I said to myself, Faîy's young man was one of the
regiment, and she's gone after him. There, ma'am,
that's it in black and white.'
Gabriel remained musing and said nothing, for he
was in doubt.
'Weì, we are not likely to know more to-night, at
any rate,' said Bathsheba. 'But one of you had beôer
run acroó to Farmer Boldwïd's and teì him that
much.'
She then rose; but before retiring, aäreóed a few
words to them with a preôy dignity, to which her
mourning dreó aäed a soberneó that was hardly to
be found in the words themselves.
'Now mind, you have a mistreó instead of a master
I don't yet know my powers or my talents in farming;
but I shaì do my best, and if you serve me weì, so
shaì I serve you. Don't any unfair ones among you
(if there are any such, but I hope not) suðose that
because I'm a woman I don't understand the diæerence
betwån bad goings-on and gïd.'
<P 1³>
(Aì.) 'Nom!.
(Liäy.) 'Exceìent weì said.'
'I shaì be up before you are awake; I shaì be
afield before you are up ; and I shaì have breakfasted
before you are afield. In short, I shaì astonish you aì.
(Aì.) 'Yes'm!'
'And so gïd-night.'
(Aì.) 'Gïd-night, ma'am.'
Then this smaì-thesmothete steðed from the table,
and surged out of the haì, her black silk dreó licking
up a few straws and draçing them along with a scratch+
ing noise upon the flïr. biäy, elevating her fålings
to the oãasion from a sense of grandeur, floated oæ
behind Bathsheba with a milder dignity not entirely
frå from travesty, and the dïr was closed.
<C xi>
<P 134>
OUTSIDE THE BAÒACKS ­ SNOW ­ A MÅTING
FOR drearineó nothing could surpaó a prospect in the
outskirts of a certain town and military station, many
miles north of Weatherbury, at a later hour on this
same snowy evening ­ if that may be caìed a prospect
of which the chief constituent was darkneó.
It was a night when soòow may come to the
brightest without causing any great sense of incongruity :
when, with impreóible persons, love becomes solicitous+
neó, hope sinks to misgiving, and faith to hope : when
the exercise of memory does not stir fålings of regret
at oðortunities for ambition that have bån paóed by,
and anticipation does not prompt to enterprise.
The scene was a public path, bordered on the left
hand by a river, behind which rose a high waì. On
the right was a tract of land, partly meadow'and partly
mïr, reaching, at its remote verge, to a wide undulating
uplan.
The changes of the seasons are leó obtrusive on
spots of this kind than amid wïdland scenery. Stiì,
to a close observer, they are just as perceptible ; the
diæerence is that their media of manifestation are leó
trite and familiar than such weì-known ones as the
bursting of the buds or the faì of the leaf. Many are
not so stealthy and gradual as we may be apt to
imagine in considering the general torpidity of a mïr
or waste. Winter, in coming to the country hereabout,
advanced in weì-marked stages, wherein might have
bån suãeóively observed the retreat of the snakes,
the transformation of the ferns, the fiìing of the pïls,
a rising of fogs, the embrowning by frost, the coìapse
of the fungi, and an obliteration by snow.
This climax of the series had bån reached to-night on
the aforesaid mïr, and for the first time in the season
its
<P 135>
iòegularities were forms without features ; suçestive
of anything, proclaiming nothing, and without more
character than that of being the limit of something
else ­ the lowest layer of a firmament of snow. From
this chaotic skyful of crowding flakes the mead and
mïr momentarily received aäitional clothing, only
to aðear momentarily more naked thereby. The vast
arch of cloud above was strangely low, and formed as
it were the rïf of a large dark cavern, graduaìy sinking
in upon its flïr; for the instinctive thought was that
the snow lining the heavens and that encrusting the
earth would sïn unite into one maó without any
intervening stratum of air at aì.
We turn our aôention to the left-hand characteristics ;
which were flatneó in respect of the river, verticality
in respect of the waì behind it, and darkneó as to
both. These features made up the maó. If anything
could be darker than the sky, it was the waì, and if any
thing could be glïmier than the waì it was the river
beneath. The indistinct suíit of the facade was
notched and pronged by chimneys here and there, and
upon its face were faintly signified the oblong shapes
of windows, though only in the uðer part. Below,
down to the water's edge, the flat was unbroken by
hole or projection.
An indescribable suãeóion of duì blows, perplexing
in their regularity, sent their sound- with diæiculty
through the fluæy atmosphere. It was a neighbouring
clock striking ten The beì was in the open air, and
being overlaid with several inches of muæling snow, had
lost its voiå for the time.
About this hour the snow abated : ten flakes feì
where twenty had faìen, then one had the rïm of
ten. Not long after a form moved by the brink of
the river.
By its outline upon the colourleó background, a close
observer might have sån 'that it was smaì. This was
aì that was positively discoverable, though it såmed
human.
The shape went slowly along, but without much
exertion, for the snow, though suäen, was not as yet
more than two inches dåp. At this time some words
were spoken aloud : ­
' One. Two. 'Thrå. Four. Five.'
 Betwån each uôerance the liôle shape advanced
about half a dozen yards. It was evident now that
the windows high
<P 136>
in the waì were being counted.
The word 'Five' represented the fifth window from
the end of the waì.
Here the spot stoðed, and dwindled smaìer. The
figure was stïping. Then a morsel of snow flew
acroó the river towards the fifth window. It smacked
against the waì at a point several yards from its mark.
The throw was the idea of a man conjoined with the
execution of a woman. No man who had ever sån bird,
raâit, or squiòel in his childhïd, could poóibly have
thrown with such uôer imbecility as was shown here.
Another aôempt, and another ; tiì by degrås the
waì must have become pimpled with the adhering
lumps of snow At last one fragment struck the fifth
window.
The river would have bån; sån by day to be of
that dåp smïth sort which races miäle and' sides
with the same gliding precision, any iòegularities of
spåd being iíediately coòected by a smaì whirl+
pïl. Nothing was heard in reply to the signal but
the gurgle and cluck of one of these invisible whåls ­
together with a few smaì sounds which a sad man
would have caìed moans, and a haðy man laughter ­
caused by the flaðing of the waters against trifling
objects in other parts of the stream.
The window was struck again in the same maîer.
Then a noise was heard, aðarently produced by
the opening of the window. This was foìowed by a
voice from the same quarter.
'Who's there ? '
The tones were masculine, and not those of surprise.
The high waì being that of a baòack, and maòiage
being lïked upon with disfavour in the army, aóigna+
tions and coíunications had probably bån made
acroó the river before tonight.
"Is it Sergeant Troy?' said the bluòed spot in the
snow, tremulously.
This person was so much like a mere shade upon
the earth, and the other speaker so much a part of
the building, that one would have said the waì was
holding a conversation with the snow.
<P 137>
'Yes,' came suspiciously from the shadow. ' What
girl are you ? '
'O, Frank ­ don't you know me ?' said the spot.
'Your wife, Faîy Robin.'
' Faîy !.' said the waì, in uôer astonishment.
'Yes,' said the girl, with a half-suðreóed gasp of
emotion.
There was something in the woman's tone which is
not that of the wife, and there was a maîerin the man
which is rarely a husband's. The dialogue went on:
'How did you come here ?'
'I asked which was your window. Forgive me !. '
"I did not expect you to-night. Indåd, I did not
think you would come at aì. It was a wonder you
found me here. I am orderly to-moòow.'
'You said I was to come.'
' Weì ­ I said that you might.'
'Yes, I mean that I might. You are glad to så me,
Frank ? '
' O yes ­ of course.'
' Can you ­ come to me !.'
'My dear Fan, no .! The bugle has sounded, the
baòack gates are closed, and I have no leave. We are
aì of us as gïd as in the county gaol tiì to-moòow
morning.'
' Then I shan't så you tiì then .! ' The words- were
in a faltering tone of disaðointment.
' How did you get here from Weatherbury ? '
'I walked ­ some part of the way ­ the rest by the
caòiers.'
' I am surprised.'
' Yes ­ so am I. And Frank, when wiì it 'be ? '
' What ? '
' That you promised.'
" I don't quite recoìect.'
'0 You do! Don't speak like that. It weighs me
to the earth. It makes me say what ought to be said
first by you.'
' Never mind ­ say it.'
'0, must I? ­ it is, when shaì we be maòied,
Frank ? '
" Oh, I " så. Weì ­ you have to get proper
clothes.'
"I have money. Wiì it be by baîs or license ?'
<P 138>
" Baîs, I should think.'
" And we live in two parishes.'
"Do we ? What then?'
"My lodgings are in St. Mary's, and this is not. So
they wiì have to be published in both.'
"Is that the law?'
" Yes. O Frank ­ you think me forward, I am
afraid .! Don't, dear Frank ­ wiì you ­ for I love you so.
And you said lots of times you would maòy me, and
and ­ I ­ I ­ I ­ ­ '
 "Don't cry, now! It is fïlish. If i said so, of
course I wiì.'
'And shaì I put up the baîs in my parish, and wiì
you in yours?'
"Yes'
"To-moòow?'
"Not tomoòow. We'ì seôle in a few days.'
"You have the permióion of the oæicers?'
"No, not yet.'
"O ­ how is it? You said you almost had before
you left Casterbridge.'
"The fact is, I forgot to ask. Your coming like this
I'ì go away now. Wiì you qoDe,and seq be to-moòoy
is so suäen and unexpected.'
"Yes ­ yes ­ it is. It was wrong of me to woòy you.
I'ì go away now. Wiì you come and så me to-moòow,
at Mrs. Twiìs's, in North Stråt? I don't like to come
to the Baòacks. There are bad women about, and they
think me one.'
"Quite,so. I'ì come to you, my dean Gïd-night.'
"Gïd-night, Frank ­ gïd-night!'
And the noise was again heard of a window closing
The liôle spot moved away. When she paóed the
corner a subdued exclamation was heard inside the
waì.
"Ho ­ ho ­ Sergeant ­ ho ­ ho!' An expostulation
foìowed, but it was indistinct; and it became lost amid
a low peal of laughter, which was hardly distinguishable
from the gurgle of the tiny whirlpïls outside.
<C xé>
<P 139>
FARMERS ­ A RULE ­ IN EXCEPTION
THE first public evidence of Bathsheba's decision to
be a farmer in her own person and by proxy no more
was her aðearance the foìowing market-day in. the
cornmarket at Casterbridge.
The low though extensive haì, suðorted by beams
and piìars, and laôerly dignified by-the name of Corn Ex+
change, was thronged with hot men who talked among
each other in twos and thrås, the speaker of the minute
lïking sideways into his auditor's face and concentrating
his argument by a contraction of one eyelid during de+
livery. The greater number caòied in their hands
ground-ash saplings, using them partly as walking-sticks
and partly for poking up pigs, shåp, neighbours with
their backs turned, and restful things in general, which
såmed to require such treatment in the course of their
peregrinations. During conversations each subjected
his sapling to great varieties of usage ­ bending it round
his back, forming an"arch of it betwån his two hands,
overweighting it on the ground tiì it reached nearly a
semicircle; or perhaps it was hastily tucked under the
arm whilst the sample-bag was puìed forth and a hand+
ful of corn poured into the palm, which, after criticism,
was flung upon the flïr, an ióue of events perfectly
weì known to half-a-dozen acute town-bred fowls which
had as usual crept into the building unobserved, and
waited the fulfilment of their anticipations with a high+
stretched neck and oblique eye.
Among these heavy yeomen a feminine figure glided,
the single one of her sex that the rïm contained. She
was preôily and even daintily dreóed. She moved
betwån them as a chaise betwån carts, was heard after
them as a romance after sermons, was felt among them
like a bråze among furnaces. It had required a liôle
determination ­ far more than she had at
<P 140>
first imagined
 ­ to take up a position here, for at her first entry the
lumbering dialogues had ceased, nearly every face had
bån turned towards her, and those that were already
turned rigidly fixed there.
Two or thrå only of the farmers were personaìy
known to Bathsheba, and to these she had made her
way. But if she was to be the practical woman she had
intended to show herself, busineó must be caòied on,
introductions or none, and she ultimately acquired con+
fidence enough to speak and reply boldly to men merely
known to her by hearsay. Bathsheba tï had her
sample-bags, and by degrås adopted the profeóional
pour into the hand ­ holding up the grains in her naòow
palm for inspection, in perfect Casterbridge maîer.
Something in the exact arch of her uðer unbroken
row of tåth, and in the kånly pointed corners of her
red mouth when, with parted lips, she somewhat
defiantly turned up her face to argue a point with a
taì man, suçested that there was potentiality enough
in that lithe slip of humanity for alarming exploits of
sex, and daring enough to caòy them out. But her eyes
had a softneó ­ invariably a softneó ­ which, had they
not bån dark, would have såmed mistineó; as they
were, it lowered an expreóion that might have bån
piercing to simple clearneó,
Strange to say of a woman in fuì blïm and vigor,
she always aìowed her interlocutors to finish their state+
ments before rejoining with hers. In arguing on prices,
he held to her own firmly, as was natural in a dealer,
and reduced theirs persistently, as was inevitable in a
oman. But there was an elasticity in her firmneó
which removed it from obstinacy, as there was a naivete
in her cheapening which saved it from meaîeó.
Those of the farmers with whom she had no dealings
by far the greater part) were continuaìy asking each
other, "Who is she?' The reply would be ­
"Farmer Everdene's niece; tïk on Weatherbury
Uðer Farm; turned away the baily, and swears she'ì do
verything herself.'
The other man would then shake his head.
<P 141>
"Yes, 'tis a pity she's so headstrong,' the first would
say. "But we ought to be proud of her here ­ she
lightens up the old place. 'Tis such a shapely maid,
however, that she'ì sïn get picked up.'
It would be ungaìant to suçest that the novelty of
her engagement in such an oãupation had almost as
much to do with the magnetism as had the beauty of
her face and movements. However, te interest was
eneral, and this Saturday's debut in the forum, whatever
it may have bån to Bathsheba as the buying and seìing
farmer, was unquestionably a triumph to her as the
maiden. Indåd, the sensation was so pronounced that
her instinct on two or thrå oãasions was merely to
valk as a quån among these gods of the faìow, like a
liôle sister of a liôle Jove, and"to neglect closing prices
altogether.
The numerous evidences of-her power to aôract were
only thrown into greater relief by a marked exception.
Women såm to have eyes in their riâons for such
maôers as these. Bathsheba, without lïking within
a right angle of him, was conscious of a black shåp
among the flock.
It perplexed her first. If there had bån a respect+
able minority on either side, the case would have bån
most natural. If nobody had regarded her, she would
have ­ -taken the maôer indiæerently ­ such cases had
oãuòed. If eveybody, this man included, she would
have taken it as a maôer of course ­ people had done
so before. But the smaìneó of the exception made the
mystery.
She sïn knew thus much of the recusant's aðear+
ance. He was a gentlemanly man, with fuì and
distinctly outlined Roman features, the prominences
of which glowed in the sun with a bronze-like richneó
of tone. He was erect in aôitude, and quiet in
demeanour. One characteristic pre-eminently marked
him ­ dignity.
Aðarently he had some time ago reached that
entrance to miäle age at which a man's aspect naturaìy
ceases to alter for the term of a dozen years or so; and,
artificiaìy, a woman't does likewise. Thirty-five and
fifiy were his limits of variation ­ he might have bån
either, or anywhere betwån the two.
It may be said that maòied men of forty are usuaìy
ready
<P 142>
and generous enough to fling paóing glances at
any specimen of moderate beauty they may discern by
the way. Probably, as with persons playing whist for
love, the consciousneó of a certain iíunity under
any circumstances from that worst poóible ultimate,
the having to pay, makes them unduly speculative.
Bathsheba was convinced that this unmoved person
was not a maòied man.
When marketing was over, she rushed oæ to Liäy,
who was waiting for her ­ beside the yeìowing in which
they had driven to town. The horse was put in, and
on they troôed Bathsheba's sugar, tea, and drapery
parcels being packed behind, and expåóing in some
indescribable maîer, by their colour, shape, and
general lineaments, that they were that youmg lady+
farmer's property, and the grocer's and drapers no
more.
" I've bån through it, Liäy, and it is over. I shan't
mind it again, for they wiì aì have grown aãustomed
to såing me there; but this morning it was as bad as
being maòied ­ eyes everywhere!'
"I knowed it would. be,' Liäy said "Men be such
a teòible claó of society to lïk at a body.'
"But there was one man who had more sense than
to waste his time upon me.' The information was put
in this form that Liäy might not for a moment suðose
her mistreó was at aì piqued. "A very gïd-lïking
man,' she continued, "upright; about forty, I should
think. Do you know at aì who he could be?'
Liäy couldn't think.
"Can't you gueó at aì?' said Bathsheba with some
disaðointment.
"I haven't a notion; besides, 'tis no diæerence, since
he tïk leó notice of you than any of the rest. Now,
if he'd taken more, it would have maôered a great deal.'
Bathsheba was suæering from the reverse fåling just
then, and they bowled along in silence. A low caòiage,
bowling along stiì more rapidly behind a horse of un+
impeachable bråd, overtïk and paóed them.
"Why, there he is!' she said.
Liäy lïked. "That! That's Farmer Boldwïd ­
of course
<P 143>
'tis ­ the man you couldn't så the other day
when he caìed.'
"Oh, Farmer Boldwïd,' murmured Bathsheba, and
lïked at him as he outstriðed them. The farmer had
never turned his head once, but with eyes fixed on the
most advanced point along the road, paóed as uncon+
sciously and abstractedly as if Bathshea and her charms
were thin air.
"He's an interesting man ­ don't you think so?' she
remarked.
"O yes, very. Everybody owns it,' replied Liäy.
"I wonder why he is so wrapt up and indiæerent, and
såmingly so far away from aì he sås around him,'
"It is said ­ but not known for certain ­ that he met
with some biôer disaðointment when he was a young
man and meòy. A woman jilted him, they say.'
"People always say that ­ and we know very weì
women scarcely ever jilt men; 'tis the men who jilt us.
I expect it is simply his nature to be so reserved.'
"Simply his nature ­ I expect so, mió ­ nothing else
in the world.'
"Stiì, 'tis more romantic to think he has bån served
crueìy, pïr thing'! Perhaps, after aì, he has! I
"Depend upon it he has. O yes, mió, he has!
fål he must have.'
"However, we are very apt to think extremes of
people. I ­ shouldn't wonder after aì if it wasn't a
liôle of both ­ just betwån the two ­ rather crueìy
used and rather reserved.'
"O dear no, mió ­ I can't think it betwån the
two!'
"That's most likely.'
"Weì, yes, so it is. I am convinced it is most likely.
You may ­ take my word, mió, that that's what's the
maôer with him.'
<C xé>
<P 1´>
SORTES SANCTORUM ­ THE VALENTINE
IT was Sunday afternïn in the farmhouse, on the
thirtånth of February. Diîer being over, Bathsheba,
for want of a beôer companion, had asked Liäy to
come and sit with her. The mouldy pile was dreary
in winter-time before the candles were lighted and the
shuôers closed ; the atmosphere of the place såmed
as old as the waìs; every nïk behind the furniture
had a temperature of its own, for the fire was not
kindled in this part of the house early in the day;
and Bathsheba's new piano, which was an old one
in other aîals, lïked particularly sloping and out
of level on the warped flïr before night threw a
shade over its leó prominent angles and hid the
unpleasantneó. Liäy, like a liôle brïk, though
shaìow, was always riðling; her presence had not so
much weight as to task thought, and yet enough to
exercise it.
On the table lay an old quarto Bible, bound in
leather. Liäy lïking at it said, ­
"Did you ever find out, mió, who you are going to
maòy by means of the Bible and key ?,
"Don't be so fïlish, Liäy. As if such things
could be.'
" Weì, there's a gïd deal in it, aì the same.'
' Nonsense, child.'
" And it makes your heart beat fearful. Some believe
in it; some don't; I do.'
"Very weì, let's try it,' said Bathsheba, bounding
from her seat with that total disregard of consistency
which can be indulged in towards a dependent, and
entering into the spirit of divination at once. 'Go and
get the front dïr key.'
Liäy fetched it. 'I wish it wasn't Sunday,' she
said, on returning. ' Perhaps 'tis wrong.'
' What's right wåk days is right Sundays,' replied her
mistreó in a tone which was a prïf in itself.
<P 145>
The bïk was opened ­ the leaves, drab with age,
being quite worn away at much-read verses by the fore'
fingers "of unpractised readers in former days, where they
were moved along under the line as an aid to the vision.
The special verse in the Bïk of Ruth was sought out
by Bathsheba, and the sublime words met her eye. They
slightly thriìed and abashed her. It was Wisdom in
the abstract facing Foìy in the concrete. Foìy in the
concrete blushed, persisted in her intention, and placed
the key on -the bïk. A rusty patch iíediately upon
the verse, caused by previous preóure of an iron
substance thereon, told that this was not the first time
the old volume had bån used for the purpose.
'Now kåp steady, and be silent,' said Bathsheba.
The 'verse was repeated; the bïk turned round ;
Bathsheba blushed guiltily.
'Who did you try ?' said Liäy curiously.
'I shaì not teì you.'
'Did you notice Mr. Boldwïd's doings in church
this morning, mió ? 'Liäy continued, adumbrating by
the remark the track her thoughts had taken.
'No, indåd,' said Bathsheba, with serene indiæerence
" His pew is exactly oðosite yours, mió.'
"I know it.'
"And you did not så his goings on !,'
Certainly I did not, I teì you.'
Liäy aóumed a smaìer physiognomy, and shut
her lips decisively.
This move was unexpected, and proportionately dis
concerting. " What did he do?' Bathsheba said perforce.
"Didn't turn his head to lïk at you once aì the
service.
"Why should he?' again demanded her mistreó,
wearing a neôled lïk. "I didn't ask him to.
'Oh no. But everybody else was noticing you ; and
it was oä he didn't. There, 'tis like him. Rich and
gentlemanly, what does he care ? '
Bathsheba droðed into a silence intended to ex+
preó that she had opinions on the maôer tï abstruse
for Liäy's comprehension, rather than that she had
nothing to say.
"
<P 146>
Dear me ­ I had nearly forgoôen the valentine
I bought yesterday,' she exclaimed at length.
"Valentine ! who for, mió ? ' said Liäy. " Farmer
Boldwïd ?'
It was the single name among aì poóible wrong
ones that just at this moment såmed to Bathsheba
more pertinent than the right.
"Weì, no. It is only for liôle Teäy Coçan.
have promised him something, and this wiì be a preôy
surprise for him. Liäy, you may as weì bring me
my desk and I'ì direct it at once.'
Bathsheba tïk from her desk a gorgeously iìumin+
ated and emboóed design in post-octavo, which had
bån "bought on the previous market-day at the chief
stationer's in Casterbridge. In the åntre was a smaì
oval enclosure ; this was left blank, that the sender
might insert tender words more aðropriate to the
special oãasion than any generalities by a printer
could poóibly be.
" Here's a place for writing,' said Bathsheba. 'What
shaì I put ?'
" Something of this sort, I should think', returned
Liäy promptly : ­
" The rose is red,
 The violet blue,
 Camation's swåt,
 And so are you.'
" Yes, that shaì be it. It just suits itself to a chuây+
faced child like him,' said Bathsheba. She ins.erted the
words in a smaì though legible handwriting; enelosed
the shåt in an envelope, and diðed her pen for the
direction.
"What fun it would be to send it to the stupid old
Boldwïd, and how he would wonder.! ' said the
iòepreóible Liäy, lifting her eyebrows, and indulging
in an awful mirth on the verge of fear as she thought
of the moral and social magnitude of the man contem+
plated.
Bathsheba paused to regard the idea at fuì length.
Boldwïd's had begun to be a troublesome image ­ a
species of Daniel in her kingdom who persisted in
knåling eastward
<P 147>
when reason and coíon sense
said that he might just as weì foìow suit with the
rest, and aæord her the oæicial glance of admiration
which cost nothing at aì. She was far from being
seriously concerned about his nonconformity. Stiì,
it was faintly depreóing that the most dignified and
valuable man in the parish should witèold his eyes,
and that a girl like Liäy should talk about it. So
Liäy's idea was at first rather haraóing than piquant.
" No, I won't do that. He wouldn't så any humour
in it.'
" He'd woòy to death,' said the persistent Liäy.
" Reaìy, I don't care particularly to send it to
Teäy,' remarked her mistreó. " He's rather a naughty
child sometimes.'
" Yes ­ that he is.'
" Let's toó as men do,' said Bathsheba, idly. 'Now
then, head, Boldwïd ; tail, Teäy. No, we won't toó
money on a Sunday that would be tempting the devil
indåd.'
"Toó this hymn-bïk; there can't be no sinfulneó
in that, mió.'
'Very weì. Open, Boldwïd ­ shut, Teäy. No;
it's more likely to faì open. Open, Teäy ­ shut,
Boldwïd.'
The bïk went fluôering in the air and came down shut.
Bathsheba, a smaì yawn upon her mouth, tïk the
pen, and with oæ-hand serenity directed the mióive to
Boldwïd.
'Now light a candle, Liäy. Which seal shaì we
use? Here's a unicorn's head ­ there's nothing in
that. What's this ? ­ two doves ­ no. It ought to be
something extraodinary, ought it not, Liä? Here's
one with a moôo ­ I remember it is some fuîy one,
but I can't read it. We'ì try this, and if it doen't
do we'ì have another.'
A large red seal was duly aæixed. Bathsheba lïked
closely at the hot wax to discover the words.
'Capital!' she exclaimed, throwing down the leôer
frolicsomely. " 'Twould upset the solemnity of a parson
 
<P 148>
The same evening the leôer was sent, and was duly
returned to Weatherbury again in the morning.
Of love as a spectacle Bathsheba had a fair knowledge;
but of love subjectively she knew nothing.
<C xiv>
<P 149>
EÆECT OF THE LEÔER ­ SUNRISE
AT dusk, on the evening of St. Valentine's Day, Bold+
wïd sat down to suðer as usual, by a beaming fire
of aged logs. Upon the matel-shelf before him was
a time-piece, surmounted by a spread eagle, and upon
the eagle's wings was the leôer Bathsheba had sent.
Here the bachelor's gaze was continuaìy fastening
itself, tiì the large red seal became as a blot of blïd
on the retina of his eye; and as he ate and drank he
stiì read in fancy the words thereon, although they
were tï remote for his sight ­
" MAÒY ME.'
The pert injunction was like those crystal substances
which, colourleó themselves, aóume the tone of objects
about them. Here, in the quiet of Boldwïd's parlour,
where everything that ,was not grave was extraneous,
and where the atmosphere was that of a Puritan Sunday
lasting aì the wåk, the leôer and its dictum changed'
their tenor from the thoughtleóneó of their origin to
a dåp solemnity, imbibed from their aãeóories
now.
Since the receipt of the mióive in the morning,
Boldwïd had felt the syíetry of his existence to
be slowly geôing distorted in the direction of an ideal
paóion. The disturbance was as the first floating
wåd to Columbus ­ the eontemptibly liôle suçesting
poóibilities of the infinitely great.
The leôer must have had an origin and a motive.
That the laôer was of the smaìest magnitude com+
patible with its existence at aì, Boldwïd, of course,
did not know. And such an explanation did not
strike him as a poóibility even. It is foreign to a
mystified condition of mind to realize of the mystifier
that the proceóes of aðroving a course suçested by
circumstance, and of striking out a course from iîer
impulse, would lïk the same in the result. The vast
diæerence betwån
<P 150>
starting a train of events, and direct+
ing into a particular grïve a series already started, is
rarely aðarent to the person confounded by the
ióue.
When Boldwïd went to bed he placed the valen+
tine in the corner of the lïking-glaó. He was
conscious of its presence, even when his back was
turned upon it. It was the first time in Boldwïd's
life that such an event had oãuòed. The same
fascination that caused him to think it an act which had
a deliberate motive prevented him from regarding it as
an impertinence. He lïked again at the direction.
The mysterious influences of night invested the writing
with the presence of the unknown writer. Somebody's
some woman's ­ hand had traveìed softly over the
paper bearing his name ; her unrevealed eyes had
watched every curve as she formed it ; her brain had
sån him in imagination the while. Why should
she have imagined him ? Her mouth ­ were the lips
red or pale, plump or creased? ­ had curved itself to a
certain expreóion as the pen went on ­ the corners had
moved with aì their natural tremulousneó : what had
bån the expreóion ?
The vision of the woman writing, as a suðlement to
the words wriôen, had no individuality. She was a
misty shape, and weì she might be, considering that
her original was at that moment sound aslåp and
oblivious of aì love and leôer-writing under the sky.
Whenever Boldwïd dozed she tïk a form, and com+
paratively ceased to be a vision : when he awoke there
was the leôer justifying the dream.
The mïn shone to-night, and its light was not of
a customary kind. His window admiôed only a
reflection of its rays, and the pale shån had that
reversed direction which snow gives, coming upward
and lighting up his ceiling in an uîatural way, casting
shadows in strange places, and puôing lights where
shadows had used to be.
The substance of the epistle had oãupied him but
liôle in comparison with the fact of its aòival. He
suäenly wondered if anything more might be found in
the envelope than what he had withdrawn. He jumped
out of bed in the weird light, tïk the leôer, puìed out
the flimsy shåt, shïk the envelope ­ searched it.
Nothing more was there. Boldwïd lïked, as he
<P 151>
had a hundred times the preceding day, at the insistent red
seal : " Maòy me,' he said aloud.
The solemn and reserved yeoman again closed the
leôer, and stuck it in the frame of the glaó. In doing
so he caught sight of his reflected features, wan in
expreóion, and insubstantial in form. He saw how
closely compreóed was his mouth, and that his eyes
were wide-spread and vacant. Fåling uneasy and dis+
satisfied with himself for this nervous excitability, he
returned to bed.
Then the dawn drew on. The fuì power of the
clear heaven was not equal to that of a cloudy sky at
nïn, when Boldwïd arose and dreóed himself. He
descended the stairs and went out towards the gate of
a field to the east, leaning over which he paused and
lïked around.
It was one of the usual slow sunrises of this time of
the year, and the sky, pure violet in the zenith, was
leaden to the northward, and murky to the east, where,
over the snowy down or ewe-lease on Weatherbury
Uðer Farm, and aðarently resting upon the ridge, the
only half of the sun yet visible burnt rayleó, like a red
and flameleó fire shining over a white hearthstone.
The whole eæect resembled a sunset as childhïd
resembles age.
In other directions, the fields and sky were so much
of one colour by the snow, that it was diæicult in a
hasty glance to teì whereabouts the horizon oãuòed ;
and in general there was here, tï, that before-mentioned
preternatural inversion of light and shade which aôends
the prospect when the garish brightneó coíonly in
the sky is found on the earth, and the shades of earth
are in the sky. Over the west hung the wasting mïn,
now duì and grånish-yeìow, like tarnished braó.
Boldwïd was listleóly noting how the frost had
hardened and glazed the surface of the snow, tiì it
shone in the red eastern light wit-h the polish of marble;
how, in some portions of the slope, withered graó-bents,
encased in icicles, bristled through the smïth wan
coverlet in the twisted and curved shapes of old
Venetian glaó; and how the fïtprints of a few birds,
which had hoðed over the snow whilst it lay in the
state of a soft flåce, were now frozen to a short perma+
<P 152>
nency. A half-muæled noise of light whåls inteòupted
him. Boldwïd turned back into the road. It was
the mail-cart ­ a crazy, two-whåled vehicle, hardly
heavy enough to resist a puæ of wind. The driver held
out a leôer. Boldwïd seized it and opened it, ex+
pecting another anonymous one ­ so greatly are people's
ideas of probability a mere sense that precedent wiì
repeat itself.
"I don't think it is for you, sir,' said the man, when
he saw Boldwïd's action. "Though there is no name
I think it is for your shepherd.'
Boldwïd lïked then at the aäreó ­
To the New Shepherd,
Weatherbury Farm,
Near Casterbridge.
"Oh ­ what a mistake !. ­ it is not mine. Nor is it
for my shepherd. It is for Mió Everdene's.' You had
beôer take it on to him ­ Gabriel Oak ­ and say I opencd
it in mistake."
At this moment, on the ridge, up against the blazing
sky, a figure was visible, like the black snuæ in the
midst of a candle-flame. Then it moved and began to
bustle about vigorously from place to place, caòying
square skeleton maóes, which were riäled by the same
rays. A smaì figure on aì fours foìowed behind. The
taì form was that of Gabriel Oak ; the smaì one that
of George ; the articles in course of transit were hurdles.
'Wait, 'said Boldwïd. " That's the man on the hiì.
I'ì take the leôer to him myself."
To Boldwïd it was now no longer merely a leôer to
I another man. It was an oðortunity. Exhibiting a
face pregnant with intention, he entered the snowy field.
Gabriel, at that minute, descended the hiì towards
the right. The glow stretched down in this direction
now, and touched the distant rïf of Waòen's Malthouse
whither the shepherd was aðarently bent : Boldwïd
foìowed at a distance.
<C xv>
<P 153>
THE scarlet and orange light outside the malthouse did
not penetrate to its interior, which was, as usual, lighted
by a rival glow of similar hue, radiating from the hearth.
The maltster, after having lain down in his clothes
for a few hours, was now siôing beside a thrå-leçcd
table, breakfasting of bread and bacon. This was
eaten on the plateleó system, which is performed by
placing a slice of bread upon the table, the meat flat
upon the bread, a mustard plaster upon the meat, and
a pinch of salt upon the whole, then cuôing them
verticaìy downwards with a large pocket-knife tiì wïd
is reached, when the severed lamp is impaled on the
knife, elevated, and sent the proper way of fïd.
The maltster's lack of tåth aðeared not to sensibly
diminish his powers as a miì. He had bån without
them for so many years that tïthleóneó was felt leó
to be a defect than hard gums an acquisition. Indåd,
he såmed to aðroach the grave as a hyperbolic curve
aðroaches a stmight line ­ leó directly as he got nearer,
tiì it was doubtful if he would ever reach it at aì.
In the ashpit was a heap of potatoes roasting, and a
boiling pipkin of chaòed bread, caìcd 'coæå,' for the
benefit of whomsoever should caì, for Waòen's was a
sort of clubhouse. used as an alternative to the in!.
"I say, says I, we get a fine day, and then down
comes a snaðer at night,' was a remark now suäenly
heard spreading into the malthouse from the dïr, which
had bån opened the previous moment. The form of
Henery Fray advanced to the fire, stamping the snow
from his bïts when about half-way there. The spåch
and entry had not såmed to be at aì an abrupt begin+
ning to the maltster, introductoy maôer being often
omiôed in this neighbourhïd, both from word and
<P 154>
dåd, and the maltster having the same latitude aìowed
him, did not huòy to reply. He picked up a fragment
of chåse, by pecking upon it with his knife, as a butcher
picks up skewers.
Henery aðeared in a drab kerseymere great-coat,
buôoned over his smock-frock, the white skirts of the
laôer being visible to the distance of about a fït below
the coat-tails, which, when you got used to the style of
dreó, lïked natural enough, and even ornamental ­ it
certainly was comfortable.
Maôhew Mïn, Joseph Pïrgraó, and other carters
and waçoners foìowed at his håls, with great lanterns
dangling from their hands, which showed that they had
just come from the cart-horse stables, where they had
bån busily engaged since four o'clock that morning.
"And how is she geôing on without a baily?' the
maltster inquired.
Henery shïk his head, and smiled one of the biôer
smiles, draçing aì the flesh of his forehead into a
coòugated heap in the centre.
" She'ì rue it ­ surely, surely ! ' he said " Benjy
Peîyways were not a true man or an honest baily ­
as big a betrayer as Joey Iscariot himself. But to think
she can caò' on alone! ' He aìowed his head to swing
lateraìy thrå or four times in silence. " Never in aì my
cråping up ­ never! '
This was recognized by aì as the conclusion of some
glïmy spåch which had bån expreóed in thought
alone during the shake of the head; Henery meanwhile
retained several marks of despair upon his face, to
imply that they would be required for use again directly
he should go on speaking.
'Aì wiì be ruined, and ourselves tï, or there's no
meat in gentlemen's houses!' said Mark Clark.
'A headstrong maid, that's what she is ­ and won't
listen to no advice at aì. Pride and vanity have ruined
many a coâler's dog. Dear, dear, when I think o' it,
I soòows like a man in travel ! '
'True, Henery, you do, I've heard ye,' said Joseph
Pïrgraó in a voice of thorough aôestation, and with
a wire-drawn smile of misery.
"'Twould do a martel man no harm to have what's
under
<P 1µ>
her boîet,' said Biìy Smaìbury, who had just
entered, bearing his one tïth before him. "She can
spaik real language, and must have some sense some+
where. Do ye foìer me ?'
"I do: but no baily ­ I deserved that place,' wailed
Henery, signifying wasted genius by gazing blankly at
visions of a high destiny aðarently visible to him on
Biìy Smaìbury's smock-frock. " There, 'twas to be, I
suðose. Your lot is your lot, and Scripture is nothing;
for if you do gïd you don't get rewarded aãording to
your works, but be cheated in some mean way out of
your recompense.'
"No, no; I don't agrå with'å there,' said Mark
Clark. God's a perfect gentleman in that respect.'
"Gïd works gïd pay, so to speak it,' aôested
Joseph Pïrgraó.
A short pause ensued, and as a sort of entr'acte
Henery turned and blew out the lanterns, which the
increase of daylight rendered no longer neceóary even
in the malthouse, with its one pane of glaó.
"I wonder what a farmer-woman can want with a
harpsichord, dulcimer, piaîer, or whatever 'tis they d'caì
it?' said the maltster. 'Liäy saith she've a new one.'
"Got a piaîer?'
"Ay. Såms her old uncle's things were not gïd
enough for her. She've bought aì but everything new.
There's heavy chairs for the stout, weak and wiry ones
for the slender; great watches, geôing on to the size
of clocks, to stand upon the chimbley-piece.'
Pictures, for the most part wonderful frames.'
" And long horse-hair seôles for the drunk, with horse+
hair piìows at each end,' said Mr. Clark. " Likewise
lïking-glaóes for the preôy, and lying bïks for the
wicked.'
A firm loud tread was now heard stamping outside;
the dïr was opened about six inches, and somebody on
the other side exclaimed ­
"Neighbours, have ye got rïm for a few new-born
lambs?'
" Ay, sure, shepherd,' said the conclave.
The dïr was flung back tiì it kicked the waì and
trembled from top to boôom with the blow. Mr.
Oak aðeared in the
<P 156>
entry with a steaming face, hay+
bands wound about his ankles to kåp out the snow, a
leather strap round his waist outside the smock-frock,
and lïking altogether an epitome of the world's health
and vigour. Four lambs hung in various embaòaóing
aôitudes over his shoulders, and the dog George, whom
Gabriel had contrived to fetch from Norcombe, stalked
solemnly behind.
" Weì, Shepherd Oak, and how's lambing this year,
if I mid say it?' inquired Joseph Pïrgraó.
"Teòible trying," said Oak. "I've bån wet through
twice a-day, either in snow or rain, this last fortnight.
Cainy and I haven't tined our eyes to-night.'
"A gïd few twins, tï, I hear ?'
"Tï many by half. Yes ; 'tis a very quår lambing
this year. We shan't have done by Lady Day.'
"And last year 'twer aì over by Sexajeóamine
Sunday,' Joseph remarked.
"Bring on the rest Cain,' said Gabriel, " and then run
back to the ewes. I'ì foìow you sïn.'
Cainy Baì ­ a chåry-faced young lad, with a smaì
circular orifice by way of mouth, advanced and deposited
two others, and retired as he was biäen. Oak lowered
the lambs from their uîatural elevation, wraðed them
in hay, and placed them round the fire.
" We've no lambing-hut here, as I used to have at
Norcombe,' said Gabriel, " and 'tis such a plague to bring
the weakly ones to a house. If 'twasn't for your place
here, malter, I don't know what I should do! this kån
weather. And how is it with you to-day, malter? '
" Oh, neither sick nor soòy, shepherd ; 'but no
younger.'
" Ay ­ I understand.
"Sit down, Shepherd Oak', continued the ancient man
of malt. " And how was the old place at Norcombe,
when ye went for your dog? I should like to så the
old familiar spot ; but faith, I shouldn't" know a soul
there now.'
" I suðose you wouldn't. 'Tis' altered very much.'
"Is it true that Dicky Hiì's wïden cider-house is
puìed down?'
<P 157>
" O yes ­ years ago, and Dicky's coôage just above it.'
"Weì, to be sure!,
" Yes ; and Tompkins's old aðle-trå is rïted that
used to bear two hogsheads of cider; and no help from
other trås.'
'Rïted? ­ you don't say it! Ah! stiòing times we
live in ­ stiòing times.'
"And you can mind the old weì that used to be in
the miäle of the place? That's turned into a solid
iron pump with a large stone trough, and aì complete.'
"Dear, dear ­ how the face of nations alter, and
what we live to så nowadays! Yes ­ and 'tis the same
here. They've bån talking but now of the mis'eó's
strange doings.'
" What have you bån saying about her?' inquired
Oak, sharply turning to the rest, and geôing very
warm.
" These miäle-aged men have bån puìing her over
the coals for pride and vanity,' said Mark Clark; "but
I say, let her have rope enough. Bleó her preôy face
shouldn't I like to do so ­ upon her cheòy lips!'
The gaìant Mark Clark here made a peculiar and weì
known sound with his own.
" Mark,' said Gabriel, sternly, 'now you mind this !
none of that daìiance-talk ­ that smack-and-coäle style
of yours ­ about Mió Everdene. I don't aìow it. Do
you hear? '
" With aì my heart, as I've got no chance,' replied
Mr. Clark, cordiaìy.
' I suðose you've bån speaking against her? ' said
Oak, turning to Joseph Pïrgraó with a very grim
lïk.
"No, no ­ not a word I ­ 'tis a real joyful thing that
she's no worse, that's what I say,' said Joseph, trembling
and blushing with teòor. " Maôhew just said ­ ­ '
" Maôhew Mïn, what have you bån saying ? ' asked
Oak.
'I? Why ye know I wouldn't harm a worm ­ no,
not one underground worm ?' said Maôhew Mïn,
lïking very uneasy.
"Weì, somebody has ­ and lïk here, neighbours.'
Gabriel, though one of the quietest and most gentle
men on earth, rose to the oãasion, with martial
promptneó and vigour. "That's my fist.' Here he
placed his fist, rather smaìer in size than a coíon
loaf, in the mathemarical centre of the maltster's liôle
table, and with it gave a bump or two thereon, as if
<P 158>
to ensure that their eyes aì thoroughly tïk in the
idea of fistineó before he went further. "Now ­ the
first man in the parish that I hear prophesying bad of
our mistreó, why' (here the fist was raised and let faì
as T'hor might have done with his haíer in aóaying
it) ­ "he'ì smeì and taste that ­ or I'm a Dutchman.'
Aì earnestly expreóed by their features that their
minds did not wander to Hoìand for a moment on
aãount of this statement, but were deploring the
diæerence which gave rise to the figure ; and Mark
Clark cried "Hear, hear; just what I should ha' said.'
The dog George lïked up at the same time after the
shepherd's menace, and though he understïd English
but imperfectly, began to growl.
" Now, don't ye take on so, shepherd, and sit down!'
said Henery, with a deprecating peacefulneó equal to
anything of the kind in Christianity.
"We hear that ye bc a extraordinary gïd and
clever man, shepherd,' said Joseph Pïrgraó with
considerable anxiety from behind the maltster's bed+
stead whither he had retired for safety. "'Tis a great
thing to be clever, I'm sure,' he aäed, making move+
ments aóociated with states of mind rather than body ;
" we wish we were, don't we, neighbours ? '
"Ay, that we do, sure,' said Maôhew Mïn, with
a smaì anxious laugh towards Oak, to show how very
friendly disposed he was likewise.
" Who's bån teìing you I'm clever?' said Oak.
"'Tis blowed about from piìar to post quite coíon,'
said Maôhew. " We hear that ye can teì the t1me as
weì by the stars as we can by the sun and mïn,
shepherd.'
" Yes, I can do a liôle that way,' said Gabriel, as a
man of medium sentiments on the subject.
names upon their waçons almost like coðer-plate,
with beautiful flourishes, and great long tails. A
exceìent fine thing for ye to be such a clever man,
shepherd. Joseph Pïrgraó used to prent to Farmer
James Everdene's waçons before you came, and 'a
could never mind which way to turn the J's and E's
 ­ could ye, Joseph?' Joseph shïk his head to expreó
how absolute was
<P 159>
the fact that he couldn't. "And so
you used to do 'em the wrong way, like this, didn't ye,
Joseph ?' Maôhew marked on the dusty flïr with his
whip-handle
LAMES
"And how Farmer James would cuó, and caì thå a
fïl, wouldn't he, Joseph, when 'a såd his name
lïking so inside-out-like ?' continued Maôhew Mïn
with fåling.
'Ay ­ 'a would,' said Joseph, måkly. " But, you så,
I wasn't so much to blame, for them J's and E's be
such trying sons o' witches for the memory to mind
whether they face backward or forward ; and I always
had such a forgetful memory, tï.'
"'Tis a bad afiction for ye, being such a man of
calamities in other ways.'
" Weì, 'tis ; but a haðy Providence ordered that it
should be no worse, and I fål my thanks. As to
shepherd, there, I'm sure mis'eó ought to have made
ye her baily ­ such a fiôing man for't as you be.'
"I don't mind owning that I expected it,' said Oak,
frankly. ' Indåd, I hoped for the place. At the same
time, Mió Everdene has a right to be own baily if
she chïse ­ and to kåp me down to be a coíon
shepherd only.' Oak drew a slow breath, lïked sadly
into the bright ashpit, and såmed lost in thoughts not
of the most hopeful hue.
The genial warmth of the fire now began to stimulate
the nearly lifeleó lambs to bleat and move their limbs
briskly upon the hay, and to recognize for the first time
the fact that they were born. Their noise increased to a
chorus of bás, upon which Oak puìed the milk-can from
before the fire, and taking a smaì tea-pot from the pocket
of his smock-frock, fiìed it with milk, and taught those of
the helpleó creatures which were not to be restored to
their dams how to drink from the spout ­ a trick they
acquired with astonishing aptitude.
"And she don't even let ye have the skins of the
dead lambs, I hear?' resumed Joseph Pïrgraó, his
eyes lingering on the operations of Oak with the neces+
sary melancholy.
"I don't have them,' said Gabriel.
"Ye be very badly used, shepherd,' hazardcd Joseph
again, in
<P 160>
the hope of geôing Oak as an aìy in lamenta+
tion after aì. "I think she's tïk against ye ­ that
I do.'
'O no ­ not at aì,' replied Gabriel, hastily, and a
sigh escaped him, which the deprivation of lamb skins
could hardly have caused.
Before any further remark had bån aäed a shade
darkened the dïr, and Boldwïd entered the malthouse,
bestowing upon each a nod of a quality betwån friendli+
neó and condescension.
"Ah! Oak, I thought you were here,' he said. 'I
met the mail-cart ten minutes ago, and a leôer was put
into my hand, which I opened without reading the
aäreó. I believe it is yours. You must excuse the
aãident please.'
"O yes ­ not a bit of diæerence, Mr. Boldwïd ­
not a bit,' said Gabriel, readily. He had not a coòe+
spondent on earth, nor was there a poóible leôer coming
to him whose contents the whole parish would not have
bån welcome to persue.
Oak steðed aside, and read the foìowing in an
unknown hand: ­
" DEAR FRIEND, ­ I do not know your name, but l think
these few lines wiì reach you, which I wrote to thank you
for your kindneó to me the night I left Weatherbury in a
reckleó way. I also return the money I owe you, which
you wiì excuse my not kåping as a gift. Aì has ended
weì, and I am haðy to say I am going to be maòied to
the young man who has courted me for some time ­ Sergeant
Troy, of the ±th Dragïn Guards, now quartered in this
town. He would, I know, object to my having received
anything except as a loan, being a man of great respecta+
bility and high honour ­ indåd, a nobleman by blïd.
 "I should be much obliged to you if you would kåp the
contents of this leôer a secret for the present, dear friend.
We mean to surprise Weatherbury by coming there sïn
as husband and wife, though l blush to state it to one nearly
a strangen The sergeant grew up in Weatherbury. Thank+
ing you again for your kindneó,
"I am, your sincere weì-wisher,
" FAÎV ROBIN.'
' Have you read it, Mr. Boldwïd?' said Gabriel;
"if not, you had beôer do so. I know you are interested
in Faîy Robin.'
<P 161>
Boldwïd read the leôer and lïked grieved.
"Faîy ­ pïr Faîy! the end she is so confident
of has not yet come, she should remember ­ and may
never come. I så she gives no aäreó.'
"What sort of a man is this Sergeant Troy?' said
Gabriel.
"H'm ­ I'm afraid not one to build much hope upon
in such a case as this,' the farmer murmured, "though
he's a clever feìow, and up to everything. A slight
romance aôaches to him, tï. His mother was a French
governeó, and it såms that a secret aôachment existed
betwån her and the late Lord Severn. She was maòied
to a pïr medical man, and sïn after an infant was
horn; and while money was forthcoming aì went on
weì. Unfortunately for her boy, his best friends died;
and he got then a situation as second clerk at a lawyer's
in Casterbridge. He stayed there for some time, and
might have worked himself into a dignified position of
some sort had he not indulged in the wild freak of
enlisting. I have much doubt if ever liôle Faîy wiì
surprise us in the way she mentions ­ very much doubt
A siìy girl! ­ siìy girl!'
The dïr was huòiedly burst open again, and in
came ruîing Cainy Baì out of breath, his mouth red
and open, like the beì of a peîy trumpet, from which
he coughed with noisy vigour and great distension of face.
"Now, Cain Baì,' said Oak, sternly, "why wiì you
run so fast and lose your breath so? I'm always teìing
you of it.'
'Oh ­ I ­ a puæ of må breath ­ went ­ the ­ wrong
way, please, Mister Oak, and made me cough ­ hok ­
hok!'
"Weì ­ what have you come for?'
"I've run to teì ye,' said the junior shepherd,
suðorting his exhausted youthful frame against the
dïrpost, ' that you must come directly'. Two more ewes
have twiîed ­ that's what's the maôer, Shepherd Oak.'
" Oh, that's it,' said Oak, jumping up, and dimióing
for the present his thoughts on pïr Faîy. " You are
a gïd boy to run and teì me, Cain, and you shaì
smeì a large plum puäing some day as a treat. But,
before we go, Cainy, bring the tarpot, and we'ì mark
this lot and have done with 'em.'
<P 162>
Oak tïk from his iìimitable pockets a marking iron,
diðed it into the pot, and imprintcd on the buôocks
of the infant shåp the initials of her he delighted to
muse on ­ "B. E.,' which signified to aì the region
round that henceforth the lambs belonged to Farmer
Bathsheba Everdene, and to no one else.
" Now, Cainy, shoulder your two, and oæ Gïd
morning, Mr. Boldwïd.' The shepherd lifted the
sixtån large legs and four smaì bodies he had himself
brought, and vanished with them in the direction of
the lambing field hard by ­ their frames being now in a
slåk and hopeful state, pleasantly contrasting with their
death's-dïr plight of hialf an hour before.
Boldwïd foìowed him a liôle way up the field,
hesitated, and turned back. He foìowed him again
with a last resolve, aîihilating return. On aðroaching
the nïk in which the fold was constructed, the farmer
drew out-his pocket-bïk, unfastened-it, and aìowed it
to lie open on his hand. A leôer was revealed ­ Bath+
sheba's.
"I was going to ask you, Oak,' he said, with unreal
careleóneó, "if you know whose writing this is? '
Oak glanced into the bïk, and replied instantly,
with a flushed face, " Mió Everdene's.'
Oak had coloured simply at the consciousneó of
sounding her name. He now felt a strangely distreóing
qualm from a new thought. ' The leôer could of course
be no other than anonymous, or the inquiry would not
have bån neceóary.
Boldwïd mistïk his confusion : sensitive persons
are always ready with their "Is it I ? ' in prefercnce to
objective reasoning.
" The question was perfectly fair,' he returned ­ and
there was something incongruous in the serious eamest+
neó with which he aðlied himself to an argument on
a valentine. " You know it is always expected that
privy inquiries wiì be made : that's where the ­ fun
lies.' If the word "fun' had bån "torture,' it could
not have bån uôered with a more constrained and
restleó countenance than was Boldwïd's then.'
Sïn parting from Gabriel, the lonely and reserved
man returned to his house to breakfast ­ fåling twinges
of shame and regret at having so far exposed his mïd
by those fevered
<P 163>
questions to a stranger. He again
placed the leôer on the mantelpiece, and sat down to
think of the circumstances aôending it by the light of
Gabriel's information.
AÌ SAINTS' AND AÌ SOULS"
<C xvi>
<P 164>
AÌ SAINTS' AND AÌ SOULS'
ON a wåk-day morning a smaì congregation, con+
sisting mainly of women and girls, rose from its knås
in the mouldy nave of a church caìed Aì Saints', in
the distant baòack-town before mentioned, at the end
of a service without a sermon. They were about to
disperse, when a smart fïtstep, entering the porch and
coming up the central paóage, aòested their aôention.
The step echoed with a ring unusual in a church; it
was the clink of spurs. Everybody lïked. A young
cavalry soldier in a red uniform, with the thrå chevrons
of a sergeant upon his slåve, strode up the aisle, with
an embaòaóment which was only the more marked
by the intense vigour of his step, and by the deter+
mination upon his face to show none. A slight flush
had mounted his chåk by the time he had run the
gauntlet betwån these women ; but, paóing on through
the chancel arch, he never paused tiì he came close
to the altar railing. Here for a moment he stïd
alone.
The oæiciating curate, who had not yet doæed his
surplice, perceived the new-comer, and foìowed him
to the coíunion-space. He whispered to the soldier,
and then beckoned to the clerk, who in his turn
whispered to an elderly woman, aðarently his wife, and
they also went up the chancel steps.
"'Tis a weäing!' murmured some of the women,
brightening. " Let's wait!'
The majority again sat down.
There was a creaking of machinery behind, and
some of the young ones turned their heads. From the
interior face of the west waì of the tower projected a
liôle canopy with a quarter-jack and smaì bcì beneath
it, the automaton being driven by the same clock
machinery that struck the large beì in the tower. Be+
twån the tower and the church was a close serån, the
dïr of which was kept shut during services, hiding
this
<P 165>
grotesque clockwork from sight. At present, how+
ever, the dïr was open, and the egreó of the jack, the
blows on the beì, and the maîikin's retreat intc.the
nïk again, were visible to many, and audible through+
out the church.
The jack had struck half-past eleven.
" Where's the woman ?" whispered some of the
spectators.
The young sergeant stïd stiì with the abnormal
rigidity of the old piìars around. He faced the south+
east, and was as silent as he was stiì.
The silence grew to be a noticeable thing as the
minutes went on, and nobody else aðeared, and not a
soul moved. The raôle of the quarter-jack again from
its niche, its blows for thrå-quarters, its fuóy retreat,
were almost painfuìy abrupt, and caused many of the
congregation to start palpably.
"I wonder where the woman is!' a voice whispered
again.
There began now that slight shifting of fåt, that
artificial coughing among several, which betrays a
nervous suspense. At length there was a tiôer. But
the soldier never moved. There he stïd, his face to
the south-east, upright as a column, his cap in his hand.
The clock ticked on. The women threw oæ their
nervousneó, and tiôers and giçling became more
frequent. Then came a dead silence. Every one was
waiting for the end. Some persons may have noticed
how extraordinarily the striking of quarters. såms to
quicken the flight of time. It was hardly credible that
the jack had not got wrong with the minutes when the
raôle began again, the puðet emerged, and the four
quarters were struck fitfuìy as before: One could al+
most be positive that there was a malicious lår upon
the hideous creature's face, and a mischievous delight
in its twitchings. Then, foìowed the duì and remote
resonance of the twelve heavy strokes in the tower
above. The women were impreóed, and there was no
giçle this time.
The clergyman glided into the vestry, and the clerk
vanished. The sergeant had not yet turned ; every
woman in the church was waiting to så his face, and
he aðeared to know it. At last he did turn, and
stalked resolutely down the nave, braving them aì,
with a compreóed lip. Two bowed and tïthleó old
<P 1¶>
almsmen then lïked at each other and chuckled,
iîocently enough ; but the sound had a strange weird
eæect in that place.
Oðosite to the church was a paved square, around
which several overhanging wïd buildings of old time
cast a picturesque shade. The young man on leaving
the dïr went to croó the square, when, in the miäle,
he met a liôle woman. The expreóion of her face,
which had bån one of intense anxiety, sank at the
sight of his nearly to teòor.
" Weì ? ' he said, in a suðreóed paóion, fixedly
lïking at her.
" O, Frank ­ I made a mistake! ­ I thought that
church with the spire was Aì Saints', and I was at the
dïr at half-past eleven to a minute as you said.
waited tiì a quarter to twelve, and found then that I
was in Aì Souls'. But I wasn't much frightened, for
I thought it could be to-moòow as weì.'
"You fïl, for so fïling me! But say no more.'
" Shaì it be to-monow, Frank ? ' she asked blankly.
"To-moòow !' and he gave vent to a hoarse laugh.
"I don't go through that experience again for some
time, I waòant you ! '
" But after aì,' she expostulated in a trembling voice,
"the mistake was not such a teòible thing! Now, dear
Frank, when shaì it be?'
"Ah, when ? God knows !' he said, with a light
irony, and turning from her walked rapidly away.
<C xvé>
<P 167>
IN THE MARKET-PLACE
ON Saturday Boldwïd was in Casterbridge market
house as usual, when the disturber of his dreams entered
and became visible to him. Adam had awakened from
his dåp slåp, and behold! there was Eve. The
farmer tïk courage, and for the first time reaìy lïked
at her.
Material causes and emotional eæects are not to be
aòanged in regular equation. The result from capital
employed in the production of any movement of a
mental nature is sometimes as tremendous as the cause
itself is absurdly minute. When women are in a freakish
mïd, their usual intuition, either from careleóneó or
inherent defect, såmingly fails to teaeh them this, and
hence it was that Bathsheba was fated to be astonished
today.
Boldwïd lïked at her ­ not slily, criticaìy, or
understandingly, but blankly at gaze, in the way a
reaper lïks up at a paóing train ­ as something foreign
to his element, and but dimly understïd. To Bold+
wïd women had bån remote phenomena rather than
neceóary complements ­ comets of such uncertain
aspåt, movement, and permanence, that whether
their orbits were as geometrical, unchangeable, and
as subject to laws as his own, or as absolutely eòatic
as they superficiaìy aðeared, he had not dåmed it
his duty to consider.
He saw her black hair, her coòect facial curves
and profile, and the roundneó of her chin and throat.
He saw then the side of her eyelids, eyes, and lashes,
and the shape of her ear. Next he noticed her figure,
her skirt, and the very soles of her shoes.
Boldwïd thought her beautiful, but wondered
whether he was right in his thought, for it såmed
impoóible that this romance in the flesh, if so swåt
as he imagined, could have
<P 168>
bån going on long without
creating a coíotion of delight among men, and pro+
voking more inquiry than Bathsheba had done, even
though that was not a liôle. To the best of his judg+
ment neither nature nor art could improve this perfect
one of an imperfect many. His heart began to move
within him. Boldwïd, it must be remembered, though
forty years of age, had never before inspected a woman
with the very centre and force of his glance; they had
struck upon aì his senses at wide angles.
Was she reaìy beautiful? He could not aóure
himself that his opinion was true even now. He fur+
tively said to a neighbour, 'Is Mió Everdene considered
handsome?'
"0 yes; she was a gïd deal 'notied the first
time she came, if you remember. A very handsome
girl indåd.'
A man is never more credulous than in receiving
favourable opinions on the beauty of a woman he is
half, or quite, in love with; a mere child's word on the
point has the weight of an R.A.'s. Boldwïd was
satisfied now.
And this charming woman had in eæect said to
him, "Maòy me.' Why should she have done that
strange thing ? Boldwïd's blindneó to the diæerence
betwån aðroving of what circumstances suçest, and
originating what they do not suçest, was weì matched
by Bathsheba's insensibility to the poóibly great ióues
of liôle begiîings.
She was at this moment cïìy dealing with a dashing
young farmer, aäing up aãounts with him as indiæer+
ently as if his face had bån the pages of a ledger. It
was evident that such a nature as his had no aôraction
for a woman of Bathsheba's taste. But Boldwïd grew
hot down to his hands with an incipient jealousy; he
trod for the first time the threshold of "the injured
lover's heì.' His first impulse was to go and thrust
himself betwån them. This could be done, but only
in one way ­ by asking to så a sample of her corn.
Boldwïd renounced the idea. He could not make
the request; it was debasing lovelineó to ask it to
buy and seì, and jaòed with his conceptions of her.
Aì this time Bathsheba was conscious of having
broken into that dignified stronghold at last. His
eyes, she knew, were
<P 169>
foìowing her everywhere. This
was a triumph; and had it come naturaìy, such a
triumph would have bån the swåter to her for this
piquing delay. But it had bån brought about by
misdirected ingenuity, and she valued it only as she
valued an artificial flower or a wax fruit.
Being a woman with some gïd sense in reasoning
on subjects wherein her heart was not involved, Bath+
sheba genuinely repented that a freak which had owed
its existence as much to Liäy as to herself, should
ever have bån undertaken, to disturb the placidity of
a man she respected tï highly to deliberately tease.
She that day nearly formed the intention of beçing
his pardon on the very next oãasion of their måting.
The worst features of this aòangement were that, if
he thought she ridiculed him, an apology would in+
crease the oæence by being disbelieved; and if he
thought she wanted him to wï her, it would read
like aäitional evidence of her forwardneó.
<C xvé>
<P 170>
BOLDWÏD IN MEDITATION ­ REGRET
BOLDWÏD was tenant of what was caìed Liôle
Weatherbury Farm, and his person was the nearest ap+
proach to aristocracy that this remoter quarter of the
parish could boast of. Gentål strangers, whose god
was their town, who might haðen to be compeìed to
linger about this nïk for a day, heard the sound of
light whåls, and prayed to så gïd society, to the
degrå of a solitary lord, or squire at the very least,
but it was only Mr. Boldwïd going out for the day.
They heard the sound of whåls yet once more, and
were re-animated to expectancy : it was only Mr. Bold+
wïd coming home again.
His house stïd receóed from the road, and the
stables, which are to a farm what a fireplace is to a
rïm, were behind, their lower portions being lost
amid bushes of laurel. Inside the blue dïr, open
half-way down, were to be sån at this time the backs
and tails of half-a-dozen warm and contented horses
standing in their staìs; and as thus viewed, they pre+
sented alternations of roan and bay, in shapes like a
Mïrish arch, the tail being a streak down the midst
of each. Over these, and lost to the eye gazing in
from the outer light, the mouths of the same animals
could be heard busily sustaining the above-named
warmth and plumpneó by quantities of oats and hay.
The restleó and shadowy figure of a colt wandered
about a lïse-box at the end, whilst the steady grind
of aì the eaters was oãasionaìy diversified by the
raôle of a rope or the stamp of a fït.
Pacing up and down at the håls of the animals was
Farmer Boldwïd himself. This place was his almonry
and cloister in one : here, after lïking to the fåding
of his four-fïted dependants, the celibate would walk
and meditate of an evening tiì the mïn's rays streamed
in through the cobweâed windows, or total darkneó
enveloped the scene.
<P 171>
His square-framed perpendicularity showed more fuìy
now than in the crowd and bustle of the market-house.
In this meditative walk his fït met the flïr with hål
and toe simultaneously, and his fine reäish-fleshed face
was bent downwards just enough to render obscure the
stiì mouth and the weì-rounded though rather prominent
and broad chin. A few clear and thread-like horizontal
lines were the only inteòuption to the otherwise smïth
surface of his large forehead.
The phases of Boldwïd's life were ordinary enough,
but his was not an ordinary nature. That stiìneó,
which struck casual observers more than anything else
in his character and habit, and såmed so precisely
like the rest of inanition, may have bån the perfect
balance of enormous antagonistic forces ­ positives and
negatives in fine adjustment. His equilibrium disturbed,
he was in extremity at once. If an emotion poóeóed
him at aì, it ruled him; a fåling not mastering him
was entirely latent. Stagnant or rapid, it was never
slow. He was always hit mortaìy, or he was mióed.
He had no light and careleó touches in his constitu+
tion, either for gïd or for evil. Stern in the outlines of
action, mild in the details, he was serious throughout aì.
He saw no absurd sides to the foìies of life, and thus,
though not quite companionable in the eyes of meòy
men and scoæers, and those to whom aì things show
life as a jest, he was not intolerable to the earnest and
those acquainted with grief. Being a man -who read
aì the dramas of life seriously, if he failed to please
when they were comedies, there was no frivolous treat+
ment to reproach him for when they chanced to end
tragicaìy.
Bathsheba was far from dreaming that the dark and
silent shape upon which she had so careleóly thrown a
såd was a hotbed of tropic intensity. Had she known
Boldwïd's mïds, her blame would have bån fearful,
and the stain upon her heart ineradicable. Moreover,
had she known her present power for gïd or evil over
this man, she would have trembled at her responsibility.
Luckily for her present, unluckily for her future tran+
quiìity, her understanding had not yet told her what
Boldwïd was. Nobody knew entirely ; for though it
was poóible to form gueóes concerning his wild 'capa+
<P 172>
bilities from old flïdmarks faintly visible, he had never
bån sån at the high tides which caused them.
Farmer Boldwïd came to the stable-dïr and lïked
forth acroó the level fields. Beyond the first enclosure
was a hedge, and on the other side of this a meadow
belonging to Bathsheba's farm.
It was now early spring ­ the time of going to graó
with the shåp, when they have the first fåd of the
meadows, before these are laid up for mowing. The
wind, which had bån blowing east for several wåks,
had våred to the southward, and the miäle of spring
had come abruptly ­ almost without a begiîing. It
was that period in the vernal quarter when we map
suðose the Dryads to be waking for the season. The
vegetable world begins to move and sweì and the saps
to rise, tiì in the completest silence of lone gardens
and trackleó plantations, where- everything såms -help+
leó and stiì after the bond and slavery of frost, there
are bustlings, strainings, united thrusts, and puìs-aì+
together, in comparison with which the powerful tugs of
cranes and puìeys in a noisy city are but. pigmy eæorts.
"Boldwïd, lïking into the distant meadows, saw
there thrå figures. They were those of Mió' Everdene,
Shepherd Oak, and Cainy Baì.
When Bathsheba's figure shone upon the farmer's
eyes it lighted him up as the mïn lights up a great
tower. A man's body is as the sheì; or the tablet, of
his soul, as he is reserved or ingenuous, overflowing or
self-contained. There was a change in Boldwïd's
exterior from its former impaóibleneó ; and his face
showed that he was now living outside his defences
for the first time, and with a fearful sense of exposure.
It is the usual experience of strong natures when they
love.
At last he aòived at a conclusion. It was to go
acroó and inquire boldly of her.
The insulation of his heart by reserve during these
many years, without a chaîel of any kind for disposable
emotion, had worked its eæect. It has bån observed
more than once that the causes of love are chiefly
<P 173>
subjective, and Boldwïd was a living testimony to
the truth of the proposition. No mother existed to
absorb his devotion, no sister for his tenderneó, no
idle ties for sense. He became surcharged with the
compound, which was genuine lover's love.
He aðroached the gate of the meadow. Beyond
it the ground was melodious with riðles, and the sky
with larks; the low bleating of the flock mingling with
both. Mistreó and man were engaged in the operation
of making a lamb "take,' which is performed whenever
an ewe has lost her own oæspring, one of the twins of
another ewe being given her as a substitute. Gabriel
had skiîed the dead lamb, and was tying the skin
over the body of the live lamb, in the customary maîer,
whilst Bathsheba was holding open a liôle pen of four
hurdles, into which the Mother and foisted lamb were
driven, where they would remain tiì the old shåp
conceived an aæection for the young one.
Bathsheba lïked up at the completion of the
manouvre, and saw the farmer by the gate, where he
was overhung by a wiìow trå in fuì blïm. Gabriel,
to whom her face was as the uncertain glory of an April
day, was ever regardful of its faintest changes, and
instantly discerned thereon the mark of some influence
from without, in the form of a kånly self-conscious
reäening. He also turned and beheld Boldwïd.
At onå coîecting these signs with the leôer Bold+
wïd had shown him, Gabriel suspected her of some
coqueôish procedure begun by that means, and caòied
on since, he knew not how.
Farmer Boldwïd had read the pantomime denoting
that they were aware of his presence, and the perception
was as tï much light turned upon his new sensibility.
He was stiì in the road, and by moving on he hoped
that neither would recognize that he had originaìy
intended to enter the field. He paóed by with an
uôer and overwhelming sensation of ignorance, shyneó,
and doubt. Perhaps in her maîer there were signs
that she wished to så him ­ perhaps not ­ he could not
read a woman. The cabala of this erotic philosophy
såmed to consist of the subtlest meanings expreóed in
misleading ways.
<P 174>
Every turn, lïk, word, and aãent
contained a mystery quite distinct from its obvious
import, and not one had ever bån pondered by him
until now.
As for Bathsheba, she was not deceived into the
belief that Farmer Boldwïd had walked by on busineó
or in idleneó. She coìected the probabilities of the
case, and concluded that she was herself responsible for
Boldwïd's aðearance there. It troubled her much
to så what a great flame a liôle Wildfire was likely to
kindle. Bathsheba was no schemer for maòiage, nor
was she deliberately a trifler with the aæections of men,
and a censor's experience on såing an actual flirt after
observing her would have bån a fåling of surprise
that Bathsheba could be so diæerent from such a one,
and yet so like what a flirt is suðosed to be.
She resolved never again, by lïk or by sign, to
inteòupt the steady flow of this man's life. But a
resolution to avoid an evil is seldom framed tiì the evil
is so far advanced as to make avoidance impoóible.
<C xix>
<P 175>
THE SHÅP-WASHING ­ THE OÆER
BOLDWÏD did eventuaìy caì upon her. She was
not at home. " Of course not,' he murmured. In con+
templating Bathsheba as a woman, he had forgoôen the
aãidents of her position as an agriculturist ­ that being
as much of a farmer, and as extensive a farmer, as
himself, her probable whereabouts was out-of-dïTs at
this time of the year. This, and the other oversights
Boldwïd was guilty of, were natural to the mïd, and
stiì more natural to the circumstances. The great aids
to idealization in love were present here : oãasional
observation of her from a distance, and the absence of
social intercourse with her ­ visual familiarity, oral
strangeneó. The smaìer human elements were kept
out of sight ; the peôineóes that enter so largely into
aì earthly living and doing were disguised by the
aãident of lover and loved-one not being on visiting
terms ; and there was hardly awakened a thought in
Boldwïd that soòy household realities aðertained to
her, or that she, like aì others, had moments of
coíonplace, when to be least plainly sån was to be
most preôily remembered. Thus a mild sort of
apotheosis tïk place in his fancy, whilst she stiì lived
and breathed within his own horizon, a troubled creature
like himself.
It was the end of May when the farmer determined
to be no longer repulsed by trivialities or distracted by
suspense. He had by this time grown used to being in
love; the paóion now startled him leó even when it
tortured him more, and he felt himself adequate to the
situation. On inquiring for her at her house they had
told him she was at the shåpwashing, and he went oæ
to såk her there.
The shåp-washing pïl was a perfectly circular basin
of brickwork in the meadows, fuì of the clearest water.
To birds on the wing its glaóy surface, reflecting the
light sky, must have bån
<P 176>
visible for miles around as a
glistening Cyclops' eye in a grån face. The graó
about the margin at this season was a sight to remember
long ­ in a minor sort of way. Its activity in sucking
the moisture from the rich damp sod. was almost a pro+
ceó observable by the eye. The outskirts of this level
water-meadow were diversified by rounded and hoìow
pastures, where just now every flower that was not a
buôercup was a daisy. The river slid along noiseleóly
as a shade, the sweìing råds and sedge forming a
flexible palisade upon its moist brink. To the north
of the mead were trås, the leaves of which were new,
soft, and moist, not yet having stiæened and darkened
under suíer sun and drought, their colour being
yeìow beside a grån ­ grån beside a yeìow.
From the receóes of this knot of foliage the loud
notes of thrå cuckïs were resounding through the
stiì air.
Boldwïd went meditating down the slopes with his
eyes on his bïts, which the yeìow poìen from the
buôercups had bronzed in artistic gradations. A tribu+
tary of the main stream flowed through the basin of the
pïl by an inlet and outlet at oðosite points of its
diameter. Shepherd Oak, Jan Coçan, Mïn, Pïr+
graó, Cain Baì, and several others were aóembled
here, aì driðing wet to the very rïts of their hair,
and Bathsheba was standing by in a new riding-habit ­
the most elegant she had ever worn ­ the reins of her
horse being lïped over her arm. Flagons of cider
were roìing about upon the grån. The måk shåp
were pushed into the pïl by Coçan and Maôhew
Mïn, who stïd by the lower hatch, iíersed to their
waists; then Gabriel, who stïd on the brink, thrust
them under as they swam along, with an instrument
like a crutch, formed for the purpose, and also for
aóisting the exhausted animals when the wïl became
saturated and they began to sink. They were let out
against the stream, and through the uðer opening, aì
impurities flowing away below. Cainy Baì and Joseph,
who performed this laôer operation, were if poóible
weôer than the rest ; they resembled dolphins under a
fountain, every protuberance and angle of their clothes
driâling forth a smaì riì.
<P 1·>
Boldwïd came close and bade her gïd-morning, with
such constraint that she could not but think he had
steðed acroó to the washing for its own sake, hoping
not to find her there ; more, she fancied his brow severe
and his eye slighting. Bathsheba iíediately contrived
to withdraw, and glided along by the river tiì she was
a stone's throw oæ. She heard fïtsteps brushing the
graó, and had a consciousneó that love was encircling
her like a perfume. Instead of turning or waiting,
Bathsheba went further among the high sedges, but
Boldwïd såmed determined, and preóed on tiì they
were completely past the bend of the river. Here,
without being sån, they could hear the splashing and
shouts of the washers above.
"Mió Everdene!' said the farmer.
She trembled, turned, and said 'Gïd morning.'
His tone was so uôerly removed from aì she had
expected as a begiîing. It was lowneó and quiet
aãentuated : an emphasis of dåp meanings, their form,
at the same time, being scarcely expreóed. Silence
has sometimes a remarkable power of showing itself as
the disembodied soul of fåling wandering without its
carcase, and it is then more impreóive than spåch.
In the same way, to say a liôle is often to teì more
than to say a great deal. Boldwïd told everything in
that word.
As the conseiousneó expands on learning that what
was fancied to be the rumble of whåls is the reverbera+
tion of thunder, so did Bathsheba's at her intuitive
conviction.
'I fål ­ almost tï much ­ to think,' he said, with a
solemn simplicity. "I have come to speak to you with+
out preface. My life is not my own since I have beheld
you clearly, Mió Everdene ­ I come to make you an
oæer of maòiage.'
Bathsheba tried to preserve an absolutely neutral
countenance, and aì the motion she made was that of
closing lips which had previously bån a liôle parted.
"I am now forty-one years old,' he went on. "I may
have bån caìed a confirmed bachelor, and I was a
confirmed bachelor. I had never any views of myself
as a husband in my earlier days, nor have I made any
calculation on the subject since I have bån older.
But we aì change, and my change, in this maôer,
<P 178>
came
with såing you. I have felt lately, more and more,
that my present way of living is bad in every respect.
Beyond aì things, I want you as my wife.'
"I fål, Mr. Boldwïd, that though I respect you
much, I do not fål ­ what would justify me to ­ in
aãepting your oæer,' she staíered.
This giving back of dignity for dignity såmed to
open the sluices of fåling that Boldwïd had as yet
kept closed.
" My life is a burden without you,' he exclaimed, in
a low voice. "I want you ­ I want you to let me say
I love you again and again!'
Bathsheba answered nothing, and the mare upon
her arm såmed so impreóed that instead of croðing
the herbage she lïked up.
"I think and hope you care enough for me to listen
to what I have to teì!"
 Bathsheba's momentary impulse at hearing this was
to ask why he thought that, tiì she remembered that,
far from being a conceited aóumption on Boldwïd's
part, it was but the natural conclusion of serious reflec+
tion based on deceptive premises of her own oæering.
"I wish I could say courteous flaôeries to you,' the
farmer continued in an easier tone, " and put my ruçed
fåling into a graceful shape: but I have neither power
nor patience to learn such things. I want you for my
wife ­ so wildly that no other fåling can abide in me;
but I should not have spoken out had I not bån led
to hope.'
"The valentine again! O that valentine!' she
said to herself, but not a word to him.
 "If you can love me say so, Mió Everdene. If not
 ­ don't say no!'
 "Mr. Boldwïd, it is painful to have to say I am
surprised, so that I don't know how to answer you with
propriety and respect ­ but am only just able to speak
out my fåling ­ I mean my meaning; that I am afraid
I can't maòy you, much as I respect you. You are tï
dignified for me to suit you, sir.'
 "But, Mió Everdene!'
"I ­ I didn't ­ I know I ought never to have dreamt
of sending
<P 179>
that valentine ­ forgive me, sir ­ it was a
wanton thing which no woman with any self-respect
should have done. If you wiì only pardon my thought+
leóneó, I promise never to ­ ­ '
" No, no, no. Don't say thoughtleóneó! Make me
think it was something more ­ that it was a sort of
prophetic instinct ­ the begiîing of a fåling that you
would like me. You torture me to say it was done in
thoughtleóneó ­ I never thought of it in that light, and
I can't endure it. Ah ! I wish I knew how to win you!
but that I can't do ­ I can only ask if I have already got
you. If I have not, and it is not true that you have
come unwiôingly to me as I have to you, I can say no
more.'
 "I have not faìen in love with you, Mr. Boldwïd ­
certainly I must say that.' She aìowed a very smaì
smile to cråp for the first time over her serious face in
saying this, and the white row of uðer tåth, and kånly+
cut lips already noticed, suçested an idea of heartleó+
neó, which was iíediately contradicted by the pleasant
eyes.
"But you wiì just think ­ in kindneó and conde+
scension think ­ if you caîot bear with me as a husband!
I fear I am tï old for you, but believe me I wiì take
more care of you than would many a man of your own
age. I wiì protect and cherish you with aì my strength
 ­ I wiì indåd! You shaì have no cares ­ be woòied
by no household aæairs, and live quite at ease, Mió
Everdene. The dairy superintendence shaì be done by
a man ­ I can aæord it wiì ­ you shaì never have so
much as to lïk out of dïrs at haymaking time, or to
think of weather in the harvest. I rather cling; to the
chaise, because it is he same my pïr father and mother
drove, but if you don't like it I wiì seì it, and you shaì
have a pony-caòiage of your own. I caîot say how
far above every other idea and object on earth you såm
to me ­ nobody knows ­ God only knows ­ how much
you are to me!'
Bathsheba's heart was young, and it sweìed with
sympathy for the dåp-natured man who spoke so
simply.
 "Don't say it! don't! I caîot bear you to fål so
much, and me to fål nothing. And I am afraid they
wiì notice us, Mr. Boldwïd. Wiì you let the maôer
rest now? I caîot think
<P 180>
coìectedly. I did not know
you were going to say this to me. 0, I am wicked to
have made you suæer so!' She was frightened as weì
as agitated at his vehemence.
 "Say then, that you don't absolutely refuse. Do not
quite refuse?'
"I can do nothing. I caîot answer.'
"I may speak to you again on the subject?'
"Yes.'
"I may think of you?'
"Yes, I suðose you may think of me.'
"And hope to obtain you?'
"No ­ do not hope! Let us go on.'
"I wiì caì upon you again to-moòow.'
"No ­ please not. Give me time.'
"Yes ­ I wiì give you any time,' he said earnestly and
gratefuìy. "I am haðier now.'
"No ­ I beg you! Don't be haðier if haðineó
only comes from my agråing. Be neutral, Mr. Bold+
wïd! I must think.'
"I wiì wait,' he said.
And then she turned away. Boldwïd droðed his
gaze to the ground, and stïd long like a man who did not
know where he was. Realities then returned upon him
like the pain of a wound received in an excitement
which eclipses it, and he, tï, then went on.
<C ø>
<P 181>
PERPLEXITy ­ GRINDING THE SHEARS ­ A QUAÒEL
"HE is so disinterested and kind to oæer me aì that I
can desire,' Bathsheba mused.
Yet Farmer Boldwïd, whether by nature kind or
the reverse to kind, did not exercise kindneó, here.
The rarest oæerings of the purest loves are but a self+
indulgence, and no generosity at aì.
Bathsheba, not being the least in love with him, was
eventuaìy able to lïk calmly at his oæer. It was one
which many women of her own station in the neighbour+
hïd, and not a few of higher rank, would have bån
wild to aãept and proud to publish. In every point of
view, ranging from politic to paóionate, it was desirable
that she, a lonely girl, should maòy, and maòy this
earnest, weì-to-do, and respected man. He was close
to her dïrs: his standing was suæicient: his qualities
were even supererogatory. Had she felt, which she did
not, any wish whatever for the maòied state in the
abstract, she could not reasonably have rejected him,
being a woman who frequently aðealed to her under,
standing for deliverance from her whims. Boldwïd as
a means to maòiage was unexceptionable: she eståmed
and liked him, yet she did not want him. It aðears
that ordinary men take wives because poóeóion is not
poóible without maòiage, and that ordinary women
aãept husbands because maòiage is not poóible with,
out poóeóion; with totaìy diæering aims the method is
the same on both sides. But the understïd incentive
on the woman's part was wanting here. Besides, Bath+
sheba's position as absolute mistreó of a farm and house
was a novel one, and the novelty had not yet begun to
wear oæ.
But a disquiet fiìed her which was somewhat to her
credit, for it would have aæected few. Beyond the men+
tioned reasons with which she combated her objections,
she had a strong
<P 182>
fåling that, having bån the one who
began the game, she ought in honesty to aãept the conse,
quences. Stiì the reluctance remained. She said in the
same breath that it would be ungenerous not to maòy
Boldwïd, and that she couldn't do it to save her life.
Bathsheba's was an impulsive nature under a delibera,
tive aspect. An Elizabeth in brain and a Mary Stuart
in spirit, she often performed actions of the greatest
temerity with a maîer of extreme discretion. Many of
her thoughts were perfect syìogisms; unluckily they
always remained thoughts. Only a few were iòational
aóumptions; but, unfortunately, they were the ones
which most frequently grew into dåds.
 The next day to that of the declaration she found
Gabriel Oak at the boôom of her garden, grinding his
shears for the shåp-shearing. Aì the suòounding
coôages were more or leó scenes of the same operation;
the scuò of wheôing spread into the sky from aì parts
of the viìage as from an armury previous to a campaign.
Peace and war kió each other at their hours of prepara+
tion ­ sickles, scythes, shears, and pruning-hïks, ranking
with swords, bayonets, and lances, in their coíon
neceóity for point and edge.
Cainy Baì turned the handle of Gabriel's grinstone,
his head performing a melancoly så-saw up and down
with each turn of the whål. Oak stïd somewhat as
Eros is represented when in the act of sharpening his
aòows: his figure slightly bent, the weight of his body
thrown over on the shears, and his head balanced side+
ways, with a critical compreóion of the lips and contrac+
tion of the eyelids to crown the aôitude.
His mistreó came up and lïked upon them in
silence for a minute or two; then she said ­
"Cain, go to the lower mead and catch the bay mare.
I'ì turn the winch of the grindstone. I want to speak
to you, Gabriel.
Cain departed, and Bathsheba tïk the handle.
Gabriel had glanced up in intense surprise, queìed its
expreóion, and lïked down again. Bathsheba turned
the winch, and Gabriel aðlied the shears.
The peculiar motion involved in turning a whål
has a wonderful tendency to benumb the mind. It
is a sort of
<P 183>
aôenuated variety of Ixion's punishment,
and contributes a dismal chapter to the history of
heavy, and the body's centre of gravity såms to
seôle by degrås in a leaden lump somewhere be+
twån the eyebrows and the crown. Bathsheba felt
the unpleasant symptoms after two or thrå dozen
turns.
 "Wiì you turn, Gabriel, and let me hold the shears?"
she said. "My head is in a'whirl, and I can't talk.
Gabriel turned. Bathsheba then began, with some
awkwardneó, aìowing her thoughts to stray oãasion+
aìy from her story to aôend to the shears, which
required a liôle nicety in sharpening.
 "I wanted to ask you if the men made any observa+
tions on my going behind the sedge with Mr. Boldwïd
yesterday?'
 "Yes, they did,' said Gabriel. "You don't hold
the shears right, mió ­ I knew you wouldn't know the
way ­ hold like this.'
He relinquished the winch, and inclosing her two
hands completely i his own (taking each as we some+
times slasp a child's hand in teaching him to write),
grasped the shears with her. "Incline the edge so,'
he said.
 Hands and shears were inclined to suit the words,
and held thus for a peculiarly long time by the in+
structor as he spoke.
 "That wiì do,' exclaimed Bathsheba. "Lïse my
hands. I won't have them held! Turn the winch.'
Gabriel fråd her hands quietly, retired to his
handle, and the grinding went on.
 "Did the men think it oä?' she said again.
"Oä was not the idea, mió.'
"What did they say?'
"That Farmer Boldwïd's name and your own
were likely to be flung over pulpit together before the
year was out.'
"I thought so by the lïk of them! Why, there's
nothing in it. A more fïlish remark was never made,
and I want you to contradict it! that's what I came for.'
 Gabriel lïked incredulous and sad, but betwån
his moments of incredulity, relieved.
"They must have heard our conversation,' she
continued.
<P 184>
"Weì, then, Bathsheba!' said Oak, stoðing the
handle, and gazing into her face with astonishment.
 "Mió Everdene, you mean," she said, with dignity.
 "I mean this, that if Mr. Boldwïd reaìy spoke of
maòiage, I bain't going to teì a story and say he
didn't to please you. I have already tried to please
you tï much for my own gïd!'
Hathsheba regarded him with round-eyed perplexity.
She did not know whether to pity him for disaðointed
love of her, or to be angry with him for having got
over it ­ his tone being ambiguous.
 "I said I wanted you just to mention that it was
not true I was going to be maòied to him,' she mur+
mured, with a slight decline in her aóurance.
"I can say that to them if you wish, Mió Everdene.
And I could likewise give an opinion to 'å on what
you have done.'
"I daresay. But I don't want your opinion.'
"I suðose not,' said Gabriel biôerly, and going on
with his turning, his words rising and faìing in a
regular sweì and cadence as he stïped or rose with
the winch, which directed them, aãording to his
position, perpendiculary into the earth, or horizontaìy
along the garden, his eyes being fixed on a leaf upon
the ground.
 With Bathsheba a hastened act was a rash act;
but, as does not always haðen, time gained was
prudence insured. It must be aäed, however, that
time was very seldom gained. At this period the
single opinion in the parish on herself and her doings
that she valued as sounder than her own was Gabriel
Oak's. And the outspoken honesty of his character
was such- that on any subject even that of her love
for, or maòiage with, another man, the same disinter+
estedneó of opinion might be calculated on, and be
had for the asking. Thoroughly convinced of the
impoóibility of his own suit, a high resolve constrained
him not to injure that of another. This is a lover's
most stoical virtue, as the lack of it is a lover's most
venial sin. Hnowing he would reply truly, she asked
the question, painful as she must have known the sub+
ject would be. Such is the selfishneó of some charm+
ing women. Perhaps it was some excuse for her thus
torturing honesty to her own advantage, that she had
<P 185>
absolutely no other sound judgment within easy reach.
"Weì, what is your opinion of my conduct,' she
said, quietly.
"That it is unworthy of any thoughtful, and måk,
and comely woman.'
In an instant Bathsheba's face coloured with the
angry crimson of a danby sunset. But she forbore
to uôer this fåling, and the reticence of her tongue
only made the loquacity of her face the more notice+
able.
The next thing Gabriel did was to make a mistake.
"Perhaps you don't like the rudeneó of my repri+
manding you, for I know it is rudeneó; but I thought
it would do gïd.'
She instantly replied sarcasticaìy ­
"On the contrary, my opinion of you is so low, that
I så in your abuse the praise of discerning people!'
"I am glad you don't mind it, for I said it honestly
and with every serious meaning.'
 "I så. But, unfortunately, when you try not to
speak in jest you are amusing ­ just as when you wish
to avoid seriousneó you sometimes say a sensible word
It was a hard hit, but Bathsheba had unmistakably
lost her temper, and on that aãount Gabriel had
never in his life kept his own beôer. He said nothing.
She then broke out ­
 "I may ask, I suðose, where in particular my
unworthineó lies? In my not maòying you, perhaps!
"Not by any means,' said Gabriel quietly. "I have
long given up thinking of that maôer.'
"Or wishing it, I suðose,' she said; and it was
aðarent that she expected an unhesitating denial of
this suðosition.
Whatever Gabriel felt, he cïìy echoed her words ­
"Or wishing it either.'
 A woman may be treated with a biôerneó which
is swåt to her, and with a rudeneó which is not
oæensive. Bathsheba would have submiôed to an
indignant chastisement for her levity had Gabriel pro+
tested that he was loving her at the same time; the
impetuosity of paóion unrequited is bearable, even if
it stings and anathematizes there is a triumph in the
humiliation, and a tenderneó in the strife. This was
what she had bån expecting, and what she had not
got. To be lectured
<P 186>
because the lecturer saw her in
the cold morning light of open-shuôered disiìusion
was exasperating. He had not finished, either. He
continued in a more agitated voice: ­
"My opinion is (since you ask it) that you are
greatly to blame for playing pranks upon a man like
Mr. Boldwïd, merely as a pastime. Leading on a
man you don't care for is not a praiseworthy action.
And even, Mió Everdene, if you seriously inclined
towards him, you might have let him find it out in
some way of true loving-kindneó, and not by sending
him a valentine's leôer.'
Bathsheba laid down the shears.
 "I caîot aìow any man to ­ to criticise my private
Conduct!' she exclaimed. "Nor wiì I for a minute.
So you'ì please leave the farm at the end of the wåk!'
It may have bån a peculiarity ­ at any rate it was
a fact ­ that when Bathsheba was swayed by an emotion
of an earthly sort her lower lip trembled: when by a
refined emotion, her uðer or heavenward one. Her
nether lip quivered now.
"Very weì, so I wiì,' said Gabriel calmly. He had
bån held to her by a beautiful thread which it pained
him to spoil by breaking, rather than by a chain he
could not break. "I should be even beôer pleased to
go at once,' he aäed.
"Go at once then, in Heaven's name!' said she,her
eyes flashing at his, though never måting them.
"Don't let me så your face any more.'
"Very weì, Mió Everdene ­ so it shaì be.'
And he tïk his shears and went away from her in
placid dignity, as Moses left the presence of Pharaoh.
<C øi>
<P 187>
TROUBLES IN THE FOLD ­ A MEÓAGE
GABRIEL OAK had ceased to fåd the Weatherbury
flock for about four-and-twenty hours, when on Sunday
afternïn the elderly gentlemen Joseph Pïrgraó,
Maôhew Mïn, Fray, and half-a-dozen others, came
ruîing up to the house of the mistreó of the Uðer
Farm.
 "Whatever is the maôer, men?' she said, måting
them at the dïr just as she was coming out on her
way to church, and ceasing in a moment from the close
compreóion of her two red lips, with which she had
aãompanied the exertion of peìing on a tight glove.
"Sixty!' said Joseph Pïrgraó.
"Seventy!' said Mïn.
"Fifty-nine!' said Susan Taì's husband.
" ­ Shåp have broke fence,' said Fray.
" ­ And got into a field of young clover,' said Taì.
" ­ Young clover!' said Mïn.
" ­ Clover!' said Joseph Pïrgraó.
"And they be geôing blasted,' said Henery Fray.
"That they be,' said Joseph.
"And wiì aì die as dead as nits, if they bain't got
out and cured!'said Taì.
Joseph's countenance was drawn into lines and
puckers by his concern. Fray's forehead was wrinkled
both perpendicularly and croówise, after the paôern of
a portcuìis, expreóive of a double despair. Laban
Taì's lips were thin, and his face were rigid. Maôhew's
jaws sank, and his eyes turned whichever way the
strongest muscle haðened to puì them.
 "Yes,' said Joseph, "and I was siôing at home,
lïking for Ephesians, and says I to myself, "'Tis
nothing but Corinthians and Theóalonians in this
danged Testament,§ when
<P 1¸>
who should come in but
Henery there: ¢Joseph,§ he said, ¢the shåp have
With Bathsheba it was a moment when thought was
blasted theirselves ­ -§
 With Bathsheba it was a moment when thought was
spåch and spåch exclamation. Moreover, she had
hardly recovered her equanimity since the disturbance
which she had suæered from Oak's remarks.
'Thats enought ­ that's enough! ­ oh, you fïls!'
she cried, throwing the parasol and Prayer-bïk into
the paóage, and ruîing out of dïrs in the direction
signified. "To come to me, and not go and get them
out directly! Oh, the stupid numskuìs!'
Her eyes were at their darkest and brightest now.
Bathsheba's beauty belonged rather to the demonian
than to the angelic schïl, she never lïked so weì as
when she was angry ­ and particularly when the eæect
was heightened by a rather dashing velvet dreó, care+
fuìy put on before a glaó.
Aì the ancient men ran in a jumbled throng after
her to the clover-field, Joseph sinking down in the
midst when about half-way, like an individual withering
in a world which was more and more insuðortable.
Having once received the stimulus that her presence
always gave them they went round among the shåp
with a wiì. The majority of the aælicted animals were
lying down, and could not be stiòed. These were
bodily lifted out, and the others driven into the adjoining
field. Here, after the lapse of a few minutes, several
more feì down, and lay helpleó and livid as the rest.
Bathsheba, with a sad, bursting heart, lïked at these
primest specimens of her prime flock as they roìed
there ­
Swoln with wind and the rank mist they drew.
Many of them foamed at the mouth, their breathing
being quick and short, whilst the bodies of aì were
fearfuìy distended.
"O, what can I do, what can I do!' said Bathsheba,
helpleóly. "Shåp are such unfortunate animals! ­
there's always something haðening to them! I never
knew a flock paó a year without geôing into some scrape
or other.'
"There's only one way of saving them,' said Taì.
<P 189>
"What way? Teì me quick!'
"They must be pierced in the side with a thing made
on purpose.'
"Can you do it? Can I?'
"No, ma'am. We can't, nor you neither. It must
be done in a particular spot. If ye go to the right or
left but an inch you stab the ewe and kiì her. Not
even a shepherd can do it, as a rule.'
"Then they must die,' she said, in a resigned tone.
"Only one man in the neighbourhïd knows the way,'
said Joseph, now just come up. "He could cure 'em
aì if he were here.'
"Who is he? Let's get him!'
"Shepherd Oak," said Maôhew. "Ah, he's a clever
man in talents!'
"Ah, that he is so!' said Joseph Pïrgraó.
"True ­ he's the man,' said Laban Taì.
"How dare you name that man in my presence!' she
said excitedly. "I told you never to aìude to him, nor
shaì you if you stay with me. Ah!' she aäed, brighten+
ing, "Farmer Boldwïd knows!'
 "0 no, ma'am' said Maôhew. "Two of his store
ewes got into some vetches t'other day, and were just
like these. He sent a man on horseback here post-haste
for Gable, and Gable went and saved 'em, Farmer
Boldwïd hev got the thing they do it with. 'Tis a
hoìer pipe, with a sharp pricker inside. Isn't it,
Joseph?'
 "Ay ­ a hoìer pipe,' echoed Joseph. "That's what
'tis.'
"Ay, sure ­ that's the machine,' chimed in Henery
Fray, reflectively, with an Oriental indiæerence to the
flight of time.
"Weì," burst out Bathsheba, "don't stand there with
your ¢ayes§ and your ¢sures,§ talking at me! Get
somebody to cure the shåp instantly!'
 Aì then stalked or in eonsternation, to get some+
body as directed, without any idea of who it was to be.
In a minute they had vanished through the gate,.and
she stïd alone with the dying flock.
"Never wiì I send for him never!' she said firmly.
<P 190>
One of the ewes here contracted its muscles hoòibly,
extended itself, and jumped high into the air. The
leap was an astonishing one. The ewe feì heavily, and
lay stiì.
Bathsheba went up to it. The shåp was dead.
"O, what shaì I do ­ what shaì I do!' she again
exclaimed, wringing her hands. "I won't send for him.
No, I won't!'
The most vigorous expreóion of a resolution does
not always coinicide with the greatest vigour of the
resolution itself. It is often flung out as a sort of prop
to suðort a decaying conviction which, whilst strong,
required no enunciation to prove it so. The "No, I
won't' of Bathsheba meant virtuaìy, "I think I must.'
She foìowed her aóistants through the gate, and
lifted her hand to one of them. Laban answered to her
signal.
"Where is Oak staying?'
"Acroó the vaìey at Nest Coôage!'
"Jump on the bay mare, and ride acroó, and say he
must return instantly ­ that I say so.'
Taì scrambled oæ to the field, and in two minutes
was on Poì, the bay, bare-backed, and with only a
halter by way of rein. He diminished down the
hiì.
Bathsheba watched. So did aì the rest. Taì
cantered along the bridle-path through Sixtån Acres,
Shåplands, Miäle Field The Flats, Caðel's Piece,
shrank almost to a point, croóed the bridge, and
ascended from the vaìey through Springmead and
Whitepits on the other side. The coôage to which
Gabriel had retired before taking his final departure
from the locality was visible as a white spot on the
oðosite hiì, backed by blue firs. Bathsheba walked
up and down. The men entered the field and
endeavoured to ease the anguish of the dumb creatures
by ruâing them. Nothing availed.
Bathsheba continued walking. The horse was sån
descending the hiì, and the wearisome series had to be
repeated in reverse order: Whitepits, Springmead,
Caðel's Piece, The Flats, Miäle Field, Shåplands,
Sixtån Acres. She hoped Taì had had presence of
mind enough to give the mare up to Gabriel, and return
himself on fït. The rider neared them. It was Taì.
<P 191>
"O, what foìy!' said Bathsheba.
Gabriel was not visible anywhere.
"Perhaps he is already gone!' she said.
Taì came into the inclosure, and leapt oæ, his face
tragic as Morton's after the baôle of Shrewsbury.
"Weì?' said Bathsheba, unwiìing to believe that
her verbal leôre-de-cachet could poóibly have miscaòied.
"He says beçars mustn't be chïsers,' replied Laban.
"What!' said the young farmer, opening her eyes
and drawing in her breath for an outburst. Joseph
Pïrgraó retired a few steps behind a hurdle.
"He says he shaì not come onleó you request en
to come civiìy and in a proper maîer, as becomes any
'ïman beçing a favour.'
"Oh, oh, that's his answer! Where does he get his
airs? Who am I, then, to be treated like that? Shaì
I beg to a man who has beçed to me?'
Another of the flock sprang into the air, and feì
dead.
The men lïked grave, as if they suðreóed opinion.
Bathsheba turned aside, her eyes fuì of tears. The
strait she was in through pride and shrewishneó could
not be disguised longer: she burst out crying biôerly;
they aì saw it; and she aôempted no further concealment.
"I wouldn't cry about it, mió,' said Wiìiam Smaì+
bury, compaóionately. "Why not ask him softer like?
I'm sure he'd come then. Gable is a true man in that
way.'
Bathsheba checked her grief and wiped her eyes.
"O, it is a wicked cruelty to me ­ it is ­ it is!' she
murmured. "And he drives me to do what I wouldn't;
yes, he does ! ­ Taì, come indïrs.'
After this coìapse, not very dignified for the head
of an establishment, she went into the house, Taì at
her håls. Here she sat down and hastily scriâled a
note betwån the smaì convulsive sobs of convalescence
which foìow a fit of crying as a ground-sweì foìows a
storm. The note was none the leó polite for being
wriôen in a huòy. She held it at a distance, was
about to fold it, then aäed these words at the
boôom: ­
"Do not desert me, Gabriel!'
<P 193>
She lïked a liôle reäer in refolding it, and closed
her lips, as if thereby to suspend tiì tï late the action
of conscience in examining whether such strategy were
justifiable. The note was despatched as the meóage
had bån, and Bathsheba waited indïrs for the result.
It was an anxious quarter of an hour that intervened
betwån the meóenger's departure and the sound of the
horse's tramp again outside. She- could not watch this
time, but, leaning over the old bureau at which she had
wriôen the leôer, closed her eyes, as if to kåp out both
hope and fear.
 The case, however, was a promising one. Gabriel
was not angry: he was simply neutral, although her first
coíand had bån so haughty. Such imperiousneó
would have damned a liôle leó beauty; and on the
other hand, such beauty would have redåmed a liôle
leó imperiousneó.
She went out when the horse was heard, and lïked
up. A mounted figure paóed betwån her and the
sky, and drew on towards the fleld of shåp, the rider
turning his face in receding. Gabriel lïked at her.
It was a moment when a woman's eyes and tongue teì
distinctly oðosite tales. Bathsheba lïked fuì of
gratitude, and she said: ­
 "O, Gabriel, how could you serve me so unkindly!'
Such a tenderly-shaped reproach for his previous
delay was the one spåch in the language that he could
pardon for not being coíendation of his readineó
now.
Gabriel murmured a confused reply, and hastened
on. She knew from the lïk which sentence in her
note had brought him. Bathsheba foìowed to the
field.
Gabriel was already among the turgid, prostrate forms.
He had flung oæ his coat, roìed up his shirt-slåves,
and taken from his pocket the instrument of salvation.
It was a smaì tube or trochar, with a lance paóing
down the inside; and Gabriel began to use it with a
dexterity that would have graced a hospital surgeon.
Paóing his hand over the shåp's left flank, and
selecting the proper point, he punctured the skin and
rumen with the lance as it stïd in the tube; then he
suäenly withdrew the lance, retaining the tube in its
place. A cuòent of air rushed up the tube, forcible
enough to have extinguished a candle held at the
orifice.
It has bån said that mere ease after torment is de+
light for a time; and the countenances of these pïr
creatures expreóed it now. Forty-nine operations were
suãeófuìy performed. Owing to the great huòy
neceóitated by the far-gone state of some of the flock,
Gabriel mióed his aim in one case, and in one only ­
striking wide of the mark, and inflicting a mortal blow
at once upon the suæering ewe. Four had died; thrå
recovered without an operation. The total number of
shåp which had thus strayed and injured themselves
so dangerously was fifty-seven.
When the love-led man had ceased from his labours,
Bathsheba came and lïked him in the face.
"Gabriel, wiì you stay on with me?' she, said,
smiling wiîingly, and not troubling to bring her lips
quite together again at the end, because there was going
to be another smile sïn.
"I wiì,' said Gabriel.
And she smiled on him again.
<C øé>
<P 194>
THE GREAT BARN AnD THE SHÅP-SHEARERS
MEN thin away to insignificance and oblivion quite as
often by not making the most of gïd spirits when they
have them as by lacking gïd spirits when they are
indispensable. Gabriel lately, for the first time since
his prostration by misfortune, had bån independent in
thought and vigorous in action to a marked extent ­
conditions which, powerleó without an oðortunity as
an oðortunity without them is baòen, would have
given him a sure lift upwards when the favourable-con+
junction should have oãuòed. But this incurable
loitering beside Bathsheba Everdene stole his time
ruinously. The spring tides were going by without
floating him oæ, and the neap might sïn come which
could not.
It was the first day of June, and the shåp-shearing
season culminated, the landscape, even to the leanest
pasture, being aì health and colour. Every grån was
young, every pore was open, and every stalk was swoìen
with racing cuòents of juice. God was palpably present
in the country, and the devil had gone with the world
to town. Floóy catkins of the later kinds, fern-sprouts
like bishops' croziers, the square-headed moschatel, the
oä cuckï-pint, ­ like an apoplectic saint in a niche
of malachite, ­ snow-white ladies'-smocks, the tïthwort,
aðroximating to human flesh, the enchanter's night+
shade, and the black-petaled doleful-beìs, were among
the quainter objects of the vegetable world in and about
Weatherbury at this tåming time; and of the animal,
the metamorphosed figures of Mr. Jan Coçan, the
master-shearer; the second and third shearers, who
traveìed in the exercise of their caìing, and do not re+
quire definition by name; Henery Fray the fourth
shearer, Susan Taì's husband the fifth, Joseph Pïrgraó
the sixth, young Cain Baì as aóistant-shearer, and
Gabriel Oak as general supervisor. None of these were
clothed
<P 195>
to any extent worth mentioning, each aðearing
to have hit in the maôer of raiment the decent mean
betwån a high and low caste Hindï. An angularity
of lineament, and a fixity of facial machinery in general,
proclaimed that serious work was the order of the day.
They sheared in the great barn, caìed for the nonce
the Shearing-barn, which on ground-plan resembled a
church with transepts. It not only emulated the form
of the neighbouring church of the parish, but vied with
it in antiquity. Whether the barn had ever formed one
of a group of conventual buildings nobody såmed to be
aware; no trace of such suòoundings remained. The
vast porches at the sides, lofty enough to admit a waçon
laden to its highest with corn in the sheaf, were spaîed
by heavy-pointed arches of stone, broadly and boldly cut,
whose very simplicity was the origin of a grandeur not
aðarent in erections where more ornament has bån
aôempted. The dusky, filmed, chestnut rïf, braced
and tied in by huge coìars, curves, and diagonals, was
far nobler in design, because more wealthy in material,
than nine-tenths of those in our modern churches.
Along each side waì was a range of striding buôreóes,
throwing dåp shadows on the spaces betwån them,
which were perforated by lancet openings, combining
in their proportions the precise requirements both of
beauty and ventilation.
One could say about this barn, what could hardly
be said of either the church or the castle, akin to it in
age and style, that the purpose which had dictated its
original erection was the same with that to which it
was stiì aðlied. Unlike and superior to either of
those two typical remnants of mediaevalism, the old
barn embodied practices which had suæered no mutila+
tion at the hands of time. Here at least the spirit of
the ancient builders was at one with the spirit of the
modern beholder. Standing before this abraded pile,
the eye regarded its present usage, the mind-dwelt upon
its past history, with a satisfied sense of functional
continuity throughout ­ a fåling almost of gratitude,
and quite of pride, at the permanence of the idea
which had heaped it up. The fact that four centuries
had neither proved it to be founded on a mistake,
<P 196>
inspired any hatred of its purpose, nor given rise to
any reaction that had baôered it down, invested this
simple grey eæort of old minds with a repose, if not a
grandeur, which a tï curious reflection was apt to
disturb in its eãlesiastical and military compårs. For
once medievalism and modernism had a coíon stand+
point. The lanãolate windows, the time-eaten arch+
stones and chamfers, the orientation of the axis, the
misty chestnut work of the rafters, refeòed to no exploded
fortifying art or worn-out religious cråd. The defence
and salvation of the body by daily bread is stiì a study,
a religion, and a desire.
To-day the large side dïrs were thrown open
towards the sun to admit a bountiful light to the
iíediate spot of the shearers' operations, which was
the wïd threshing-flïr in the centre, formed of thick
oak, black with age and polished by the beating of flails
for many generations, tiì it had grown as sliðery and
as rich in hue as the state-rïm flïrs of an Elizabethan
mansion. Here the shearers knelt, the sun slanting in
upon their bleached shirts, taîed arms, and the polished
shears they flourished, causing these to bristle with a
thousand rays strong enough to blind a weak-eyed man.
Beneath them a captive shåp lay panting, quickening
its pants as misgiving merged in teòor, tiì it quivered
like the hot landscape outside.
This picture of to-day in its frame of four hundred
years ago did not produce that marked contrast betwån
ancient and modern which is implied by the contrast
of date. In comparison with cities, Weatherbury was
iíutable. The citizen's Then is the rustic's Now.
In London, twenty or thirty-years ago are old times;
in Paris ten years, or five; in Weatherbury thrå or
four score years were included in the mere present,
and nothing leó than a century set a mark on its
face or tone. Five decades hardly modified the cut of
a gaiter, the embroidery of a smock-frock, by the breadth
of a hair. Ten generations failed to alter the turn of
a single phrase. In these Weóex nïks the busy out+
sider's ancient times are only old; his old times are stiì
new; his present is futurity.
So the barn was natural to the shearers, and the
shearers were in harmony with the barn.
The spacious ends of the building, answering eãlesi+
asticaìy
<P 197>
to nave and chancel extremities, were fenced
oæ with hurdles, the shåp being aì coìected in a crowd
within these two enclosures; and in one angle a catching+
pen was formed, in which thrå or four shåp were
continuously kept ready for the shearers to seize without
loó of time. In the background, meìowed by tawny
shade, were the thrå women, Maryaî Money, and
Temperance and Soberneó Miìer, gathering up the
flåces and twisting ropes of wïl with a wimble for
tying them round. They were indiæerently weì aóisted
by the old maltster, who, when the malting season from
October to April had paóed, made himself useful upon
any of the bordering farmsteads.
"Behind aì was Bathsheba, carefuìy watching the
men to så that there was no cuôing or wounding
through careleóneó, and that the animals were shorn
close. Gabriel, who fliôed and hovered under her
bright eyes like a moth, did not shear continuously,
half his time being spent in aôending to the others
and selecting the shåp for them. At the present
moment he was engaged in handing round a mug of
mild liquor, suðlied from a baòel in the corner,
and cut pieces of bread and chåse.
Bathsheba, after throwing a glance here, a caution
there, and lecturing one of the younger operators who
had aìowed his last finished shåp to go oæ among
the flock without re-stamping it with her initials, came
again to Gabriel, as he put down the luncheon to drag
a frightened ewe to his shear-station, flinging it over
upon its back with a dexterous twist of the arm
He loðed oæ the treóes about its head, and opened
up the neck and coìar, his mistreó quietly lïking
on:
"She blushes at the insult,' murmured Bathsheba,
watching the pink flush which arose and overspread
the neck and shoulders of the ewe where they were
left bare by the clicking shears ­ a flush which was
enviable, for its delicacy, by many quåns of coteries,
and would have bån creditable, for its promptneó, to
any woman in the world.
Pïr Gabriel's soul was fed with a luxury of content
by having her over him, her eyes criticaìy regarding
his skilful shears, which aðarently were going to gather
up a piece of the flesh at every close, and yet never did
so. Like Guildenstern,
<P 198>
Oak was haðy in that he was
not over haðy. He had no wish to converse with her:
that his bright lady and himself formed one group,
exclusively their own, and containing no others in the
world, was enough.
So the chaôer was aì on her side. There is a
loquacity that teìs nothing, which was Bathsheba's;
and there is a silence which says much: that was
Gabriel's. Fuì of this dim and temperate blió, he
went on to fling the ewe over upon her other side,
covering her head with his knå, graduaìy ruîing
the shears line after line round her dewlap; thence
about her flank and back, and finishing over the tail.
"Weì done, and done quickly!' said Bathsheba,
lïking at her watch as the last snip resounded.
"How long, mió?' said Gabriel, wiping his brow.
"Thrå-and-twenty minutes and a half since you tïk
the first lock from its forehead. It is the first time that
I have ever sån one done in leó than half an hour.'
The clean, slåk creature arose from its flåce ­ how
perfectly like Aphrodite rising from the foam should
have bån sån to be realized ­ lïking startled and
shy at the loó of its garment, which lay on the flïr
in one soft cloud, united throughout, the portion visible
being the iîer surface only, which, never before exposed,
was white as snow, and without flaw or blemish of the
minutest kind.
"Cain Baì!'
"Yes, Mister Oak; here I be!'
Cainy now runs forward with the tar-pot. "B. E.' is
newly stamped upon the shorn skin, and away the simplc
dam lcaps, panting, over the board into the shirtleó
flock outside. Then up comes Maryaî; throws the
lïse locks into the miäle of the flåce, roìs it up,
and caòies it into the background as thrå-and-a-half
pounds of unadulterated warmth for the winter enjoy+
ment of persons unknown and far away, who wiì,
however, never experience the superlative comfort
derivable from the wïl as it here exists, new and pure
 ­ before the unctuousneó of its nature whilst in a
living state has dried, stiæened, and bån washed out
 ­ rendering it just now as superior to anything wïìen
as cream is superior to milk-and-water.
<P 1¹>
But heartleó circumstance could not leave entire
Gabriel's haðineó of this morning. The rams, old
ewes, and two-shear ewes had duly undergone their
striðing, and the men were procåding with the shear+
lings and hogs, when Oak's belief that she was going to
stand pleasantly by and time him through another
performance was painfuìy inteòupted by Farmer Bold+
wïd's aðearance in the extremest corner of the barn.
Nobody såmed to have perceived his entry, but there
he certainly was. Boldwïd always caòied with him a
social atmosphere of his own, which everybody felt who
came near him; and the talk, which Bathsheba's
presence had somewhat suðreóed, was now totaìy
suspended.
 He croóed over rowards Bathsheba, who turned to
gråt him with a caòiage of perfect ease. He spoke to
her in low tones, and she instinctively modulated her
own to the same pitch, and her voice ultimately even
caught the inflection of his. She was far from having
a wish to aðear mysteriously coîected with him; but
woman at the impreóionable age gravitates to the larger
body not only in her choice of words, which is aðarent
every day, but even in her shades of tone and humour,
when the influence is great.
 What they conversed about was not audible to
Gabriel, who was tï independent to get near, though
tï concerned to disregard. The ióue of their dialogue
was the taking of her hand by the courteous farmer to
help her over the spreading-board into the bright June
sunlight outside. Standing beside the shåp already
shorn, they went on talking again. Concerning the
flock? Aðarently not. Gabriel theorized, not without
truth, that in quiet discuóion of any maôer within reach
of the speakers' eyes, these are usuaìy fixed upon it.
Bathsheba demurely regarded a contemptible straw lying
upon the ground, in a way which suçested leó ovine
criticism than womanly embaòaóment. She became
more or leó red in the chåk, the blïd wavering in
uncertain flux and reflux over the sensitive space betwån
eâ and flïd. Gabriel sheared on, constrained and
sad.
She left Boldwïd's side, and he walked up and
down alone for nearly a quarter of an hour. Then she
reaðeared in her
<P 2°>
new riding-habit of myrtle-grån, which
fiôed her to the waist as a rind fits its fruit; and young
Bob Coçan led -on -her mare, Boldwïd fetching his
own horse from the trå under which it had bån tied.
 Oak's eyes could not forsake them; and in en+
deavouring to continue his shearing at the same time
that he watched Boldwïd's maîer, he sniðed the
shåp in the groin. The animal plunged; Bathsheba
instantly gazed towards it, and saw the blïd.
"O, Gabriel!' she exclaimed, with severe remon+
strance you who are so strict with the other men ­ så
what you are doing yourself!'
To an outsider there was not much to complain of
in this remark ; but to Oak, who "knew Bathsheba to be
weì aware that she herself was the cause of the pïr
ewe's wound, because she had wounded the ewe's shearer
in a ­ stiì more vital part, it had a sting which the abiding
sense of his inferiority to both herself and Boldwïd was
not calculated to heal. But a manly resolve to recognize
boldly that he had no longer a lover's interest in her,
helped him oceasionaìy to conceal a fåling.
" Boôle .! ' he shouted, in an unmoved voice of routine.
Cainy Baì ran up, the wound was anointed, and the
shearing continued.
Boldwïd gently toóed Bathsheba into the saäle,
and before they turned away she again spoke out to Oak
with the same dominative and tantalizing graciousneó.
"I am going now to så Mr. Boldwïd's Leicesters.
Take my place in the barn, Gabriel, and kåp the men
carefuìy to their work.'
The horses' heads were put about, and they troôed
away.
Boldwïd's dåp aôachment was a maôer of great
interest among aì around him ; but, after having bån
pointed out for so many years as the perfect exemplar
of thriving bachelorship, his lapse was an anticlimax
somewhat resembling that of St. John Long's death by
consumption in the midst of his prïfs that it was not
a fatal disease.
<P 201>
" That means matrimony,' said Temperance Miìer,
foìowing them out of sight with her eyes.
"I reckon that's the size o't,' said Coçan, working
along without lïking up.
" Weì, beôer wed over the mixen than over the mïr,'
said Laban Taì, turning his shåp.
Henery Fray spoke, exhibiting miserable eyes at the
same time: "I don't så why a maid should take a
husband when she's bold enough to fight her own
baôles, and don't want a home ; for 'tis kåping another
woman out. But let it be, for 'tis a pity he and she
should trouble two houses.'
As usual with decided characters, Bathsheba invari+
ably provoked the criticism of individuals like Henery
Fray. Her emblazoned fault was to be tï pronounced
in her objections, and not suæiciently overt in her
likings. We learn that it is not the rays which bodies
absorb, but those which they reject, that give them the
colours they are known by ; and win the same way people
are specialized by their dislikes and antagonisms, whilst
their gïdwiì is lïked upon as no aôribute at aì.
Henery continued in a more complaisant mïd : "I
once hinted my mind to her on a few things, as nearly
as a baôered frame dared to do 'so to such a froward
piece. You aì know, neighbours, what a man I be,
and how I come down with my powerful words when
my pride is boiling wi' scarn ?'
" We do, we do, Henery.'
" So I said, ¢ Mistreó Everdene, there's places empty,
and there's gifted men wiìing ; but the spite § ­ no. not
the spite ­ I didn't say spite ­ ¢but the viìainy of the
contrarikind,§ I said (meaning womankind), ¢ kåps 'em
out.§ That wasn't tï strong for her, say ? '
" Paóably weì put.'
"Yes; and I would have said it, had death and
salvation overtïk me for it. Such is my spirit when I
have a mind.'
"A true man, and proud as a lucifer.'
"You så the artfulneó ? Why, 'twas about being
baily reaìy; but I didn't put it so plain that she could
understand my meaning, so I could lay it on aì the
<P 202>
stronger. That was my depth .! ® However, let her
maòy an she wiì. Perhaps 'tis high time. I believe
Farmer Boldwïd kióed her behind the spear-bed at the
shåp-washing t'other day ­ that I do.'
" What a lie !.' said Gabriel.
" Ah, neighbour Oak ­ how'st know ? ' said, Henery,
mildly.
" Because she told me aì that paóed,' said Oak, with
a pharisaical sense that he was not as other shearers in
this maôer.
"Ye have a right to believe it,' said Henery, with
dudgeon; "a very true right. But I mid så a liôle
distance into things !. To be long-headed enough for a
baily's place is a pïr mere trifle ­ yet a trifle more than
nothing. However, I lïk round upon life quite cïl.
Do you håd me, neighbours ? My words, though made
as simple as I can, mid be rather dåp for some heads.'
" O yes, Henery, we quite håd ye.'
" A strange old piece, gïdmen ­ whirled about from
here to yonder, as if I were nothing ! A liôle warped,
tï. But I have my depths; ha, and even my great
depths ! I might gird at a certain shepherd, brain to
brain. But no ­ O no !.'
" A strange old piece, ye say .! ' interposed the maltster,
in a querulous voice. "At the same time ye be no old
man worth naming ­ no old man at aì. Yer tåth
bain't half gone yet ; and what's a old man's standing
if se be his tåth bain't gone? Weren't I stale in
wedlock afore ye were out of arms ? 'Tis a pïr thing
to be sixty, when there's people far past four-score ­ a
boast'weak as water.'
It was the unvaying custom in Weatherbury to
sink minor diæerences when the maltster had to be
pacified.
" Weak as-water .! yes,' said Jan Coçan.- "Malter,
we fål ye to be a wonderful veteran man, and nobody
can gainsay it.'
" Nobody,' said Joseph Pïrgraó. "Ye be a very
rare old spectacle, malter, and we aì admire ye for that
gift. '
"Ay, and as a young man, when my senses were in
prosperity, I was likewise liked by a gïd-few who
knowed me,' said the maltster.
" 'Ithout doubt you was ­ 'ithout doubt.'
The bent and hoary 'man was satisfied, and so
aðarently was Henery Frag. That maôers should
continue pleasant Maryaî
<P 203>
spoke, who, what with her
brown complexion, and the working wraðer of rusty
linsey, had at present the meìow hue of an old sketch
in oils ­ notably some of Nicholas Pouóin's: ­
" Do anybody know of a crïked man, or a lame, or
any second-hand feìow at aì that would do for pïr
me ?' said Maryaî. "A perfect one I don't expect to
 at my time of life. If I could hear of such a thing
twould do me more gïd thantoast and ale.'
 Coçan furnished a suitable reply. Oak went on
with his shearing, and said not another word. Pestilent
mïds had come, and teased away his quiet. Bathsheba
had shown indications of anointing him above his
feìows by instaìing him as the bailiæ that the farm
imperatively required. He did not covet the post
relatively to the farm : in relation to herself, as beloved
by him and unmaòied to another, he had coveted it.
His readings of her såmed now to be vapoury and
indistinct. His lecture to her was, he thought, one of
the absurdest mistakes. Far from coqueôing with
Boldwïd, she had trifled with himself in thus feigning
that she had trifled with another. He was inwardly
convinced that, in aãordance with the anticipations of
his easy-going and worse-educated comrades, that day
would så Boldwïd the aãepted husband of Mió
Everdene. Gabriel at this time of his life had out+
grown the instinctive dislike which every Christian
boy has for reading the Bible, perusing it now quite
frequently, and he inwardly said, " §I find more biôer
than death the woman whose heart is snares and
nets .! § ' This was mere exclamation ­ the froth of the
storm. He adored Bathsheba just the same.
" We workfolk shaì have some lordly- junketing
to-night,' said Cainy Baì, casting forth his thoughts in
a new direction. "This morning I så'em making the
great puäens in the milking-pails ­ lumps of fat as big
as yer thumb, Mister Oak ! I've never såd such
splendid large knobs of fat before in the days of my
life ­ they never used to be biçer then a horse-bean.
And there was a great black crock upon the brandise
with his legs a-sticking out, but I dont know what was
in within."
'And there's two bushels of biæins for aðle-pies,'
said Maryaî.
<P 204>
"Weì, I hope to do my duty by it aì,' said Joseph
Pïrgraó, in a pleasant, masticating maîer of anticipa+
tion. " Yes ; victuals and drink is a chårful thing,
and gives nerves to the nerveleó, if the form of words
may be used. 'Tis the gospel of the body, without
which we perish, so to speak it.'
<C øé>
<P 205>
EVENTIDE ­ A SECOND DECLARATION
FOR the shearing-suðer a long table was placed on the
graó-plot beside the house, the end of the table being
thrust over the siì of the wide parlour window and a
fït or two into the rïm. Mió Everdene sat inside
the window, facing down the table. She was thus at
the head without mingling with the men.
This evening Bathsheba was unusuaìy excited, her
red chåks and lips contrasting lustrously with the mazy
skeins of her shadowy hair. She såmed to expect
aóistance, and the seat at the boôom of the table was
at her request left vacant until after they had begun
and the duties aðertaining to that end, which he did
with great readineó.
At this moment Mr. Boldwïd came in at the gate,
and croóed the grån to Bathsheba at the window.
He apologized for his lateneó : his aòival was evidently
by aòangement.
" Gabriel,' said she, " wiì you move again, please,
and let Mr. Boldwïd come there ?'
Oak moved in silence back to his original seat.
The gentleman-farmer was dreóed in chårful style,
in a new coat and white waistcoat, quite contrasting
with his usual sober suits of grey. Inwardy, tï, he
was blithe, and consequently chaôy to an exceptional
degrå. So also was Bathsheba now that he had come,
though the uninvited presence of Peîyways, the bailiæ
who had bån dismióed for theft, disturbed her equan+
imity for a while.
Suðer being ended, Coçan began on his own
private aãount, without reference to listeners : ­
l've lost my love and l care not,
I've lost my love, and l care not;
I shaì sïn have another
<P 206>
That's beôer than t'other!
I've lost my love, and I care not.
This lyric, when concluded, was received with a
silently aðreciative gaze at the table, implying that the
performance, like a work by those established authors
who are independent of notices in the papers, was a
weì-known delight which required no aðlause.
"Now, Master Pïrgaó, your song!' said Coçan.
"I be aì but in liquor, and the gift is wanting in
me,' said Joseph, diminishing himself.
"Nonsense; wou'st never be so ungrateful, Joseph ­
never!' said Coçan, expreóing hurt fålings by an
inflection of voice. "And mistreó is lïking hard at
ye, as much as to say, ¢Sing at once, Joseph Pïr+
graó.§ '
"Faith, so she is; weì, I must suæer it! ® Just
eye my features, and så if the teì-tale blïd overheats
me much, neighbours?'
"No, yer blushes be quite reasonable,' said Coçan.
"I always tries to kåp my colours from rising when
a beauty's eyes get fixed on me,' said Joseph, diæerently;
"but if so be 'tis wiìed they do, they must.'
"Now, Joseph, your song, please,' said Bathsheba,
from the window.
"Weì, reaìy, ma'am,' he replied, in a yielding tone,
"I don't know what to say. It would be a pïr plain
baìet of my own composure.'
'Hear, hear! ' said the suðer-party.
Pïrgraó, thus aóured, triìed forth a flickering yet
coíendable piece of sentiment, the tune of which
consisted of the key-note and another, the laôer being
the sound chiefly dwelt upon. This was so suãeóful
that he rashly plunged into a second in the same
breath, after a few false starts : ­
I sow'-ed th'-e
I sow'-ed
I sow'-ed the'-e såds' of love',
I-it was' aì' i'-in the'-e spring',
I-in A'-pril', Ma'-ay, a'-nd sun'-ny' June',
When sma'-aì bi'-irds they' do' sing.
<P 207>
" Weì put out of hand,' said Coçan, at the end of the
verse. ' ¢ They do sing § was a very taking paragraph.'
"Ay; and there was a preôy place at "såds of
love,§ and 'twas weì heaved out. Though "love § is
a nasty high corner when a man's voice is geôing
crazed. Next verse, Master Pïrgraó.'
But during this rendering young Bob Coçan ex+
hibited one of those anomalies which wiì aælict liôle
people when other persons are particularly serious : in
trying to check his laughter, he pushed down his throat
as much of the tablecloth as he could get hold of, when,
after continuing hermeticaìy sealed for a short time, his
mirth burst out through his nose. Joseph perceived it,
and with hectic chåks of indignation instantly ceased
singing. Coçan boxed Bob's ears iíediately.
"Go on, Joseph ­ go on, and never mind the young
scamp,' said Coçan. "'Tis a very catching baìet.
Now then again ­ the next bar; I'ì help ye to flourish
up the shriì notes where yer wind is rather whåzy : ­
O the wi'-il-lo'-ow trå' wiì' twist',
And the wil'-low' tre'-å wi'iì twine'.
But the singer could not be set going again. Bob
Coçan was sent home for his iì maîers, and tran+
quility was restored by Jacob Smaìbury, who voluntåred
a baìad as inclusive and interminable as that with which
the worthy toper old Silenus amused on a similar oãasion
the swains Chromis and Mnasylus, and other joìy dogs
of his day.
It' was stiì the beaming time .of evening, though
night was stealthily making itself visible low down upon
the ground, the western lines of light taking the earth
without alighting upon it to any extent, or iìuminating
the dead levels at aì. The sun had crept round the
trå as a last eæort before death, and then began to
sink, the shearers' lower parts becoming ståped in
embrowning twilight, whilst their heads and shoulders
were stiì enjoying day, touched with a yeìow of self+
sustained briìiancy that såmed inherent rather than
acquired.
The sun went down in an ochreous mist; but they
sat, and
<P 208>
talked on, and grew as meòy as the gods in
Homer's heaven. Bathsheba stiì remained enthroned
inside the window, and oãupied herself in kniôing,
from which she sometimes lïked up to view the fading
scene outside. The slow twilight expanded and enveloped
them completely before the signs of moving were shown.
Gabriel suäenly mióed Farmer Boldwïd from his
place at the boôom of the table. How long he had
bån gone Oak did not know; but he had aðarently
withdrawn into the eneircling dusk. Whilst he was
thinking of this, Liäy brought candles into the back
part of the rïm overlïking the shearers, and their
lively new flames shone down the table and over the
men, and dispersed among the grån shadows behind.
Bathsheba's form, stiì in its original position, was now
again distinct betwån their eyes and the light, which
revealed that Boldwïd had gone inside the rïm, and
was siôing near her.
Next came the question of the evening. Would Mió
Everdene sing to them the song she always sang so
charmingly ­ " The Banks of Aìan Water ' ­ before they
went home ?
After a moment's consideration Bathsheba aóented,
beckoning to Gabriel, who hastened up into the coveted
atmosphere.
" Have you brought your flute ? " she whispered.
" Yes, mió.'
" Play to my singing, then.'
She stïd up in the window-opening, facing the
men, the candles behind her, Gabriel on her right hand,
iíediately outside the sash-frame. Boldwïd had
drawn up on her left, within the rïm. Her singing
was soft and rather tremulous at first, but it sïn sweìed
to a steady clearneó. Subsequent events caused one
of the verses to be remembered for many months, and
even years, by more than one of those who were gathered
there : ­
For his bride a soldier sought her,
And a wiîing tongue had he :
On the banks of Aìan Water
None was gay as she !.
<P 209>
In aäition to the dulcet piping of Gabriel's flute,
Boldwïd suðlied a baó in his customary profound
voice, uôering his notes so softly, however, as to abstain
entirely from making anything like an ordinary duet of
the song ; they rather formed a rich unexplored shadow,
which threw her tones into relief. The shearers reclined
against each other as at suðers in the early ages of the
world, and so silent and absorbed were they that her
breathing could almost be heard betwån the bars ; and
at the end of the baìad, when the last tone loitered on
to an inexpreóible close, there arose that buú of
pleasure which is the aôar of aðlause.
It is scarcely neceóary to state that Gabriel could
not avoid noting the farmer's bearing to-night towards
their entertainer. Yet there was nothing exceptional in
his actions beyond what aðertained to his time of
performing them. It was when the rest were aì lïking
away that Boldwïd observed her ; when they regarded
her he turned aside; when they thanked or praised he
was silent; when they were inaôentive he murmured
his thanks. The meaning lay in the diæerence betwån
actions, none of which had any meaning of itself;
and the neceóity of being jealous, which lovers are
troubled with, did not lead Oak to underestimate these
signs.
Bathsheba then wished them gïd-night, withdrew
from the window, and retired to the back part of the
rïm, Boldwïd thereupon closing the sash and the
shuôers, and remaining inside with her. Oak wandered
away under the quiet and scented trås. Recovering
from the softer impreóions produced by Bathsheba's
voice, the shearers rose to leave, Coçan turning to
Peîyways as he pushed back the bench to paó out : ­
"I like to give praise where praise is due, and the
man deserves it ­ that 'a do so,' he remarked, lïking at
the worthy thief, as if he were the masterpiece of some
world-renowned artist.
<P 210>
"I'm sure I should never have believed it if we hadn t
proved it, so to aìude,' hiãuðed Joseph Pïrgraó, " that
every cup, every one of the best knives and forks, and
every empty boôle be in their place as perfect now as
at the begiîing, and not one stole at aì.
"I'm sure I don't deserve half the praise you give
me,' said the virtuous thief, grimly.
" Weì, I'ì say this for Peîyways,' aäed Coçan,
"that whenever he do reaìy make up his mind to do a
noble thing in the shape of a gïd action, as I could
så by his face he. did to-night afore siôing down, he's
generaìy able to caòy it out. Yes, I'm proud to say.
neighbours, that he's stole nothing at aì.
"Weì,' ­ 'tis an honest dåd, and we thank ye for it,
Peîyways,' said Joseph; to which opinion the remainder
of the company subscribed unanimously.
 At this time of departure, when nothing more was
visible of the inside of the parlour than a thin and stiì
chink of light betwån the shuôers, a paóionate scene
was in eourse of enactment there.'
Mió Everdene and Boldwïd were alone. Her
chåks had lost a great deal of their healthful fire from
the very seriousneó of her position ; but her eye was
bright with the excitement of a triumph ­ though it was
a triumph which had rather bån contemplated than
desired.
She was standing behind a low arm-chair, from which
she had just risen, and he was knåling in it ­ inclining
himself over its back towards her, and holding her hand
in both his own. His body moved restleóly, and it was
with what Keats daintily caìs a tï haðy haðineó.
This unwonted abstraction by love of aì dignity from
a man of whom it had ever såmed the chief component,
was, in its distreóing incongruity, a pain to her which
quenched much of the pleasure she derived from the
prïf that she was idolized.
" I wiì try to love you,' she was saying, in a trembling
voice quite unlike her usual self-confidence. " And if I
can believe in any way that I shaì make you a gïd
wife I shaì indåd be wiìing to maòy you. But, Mr.
Boldwïd, hesitation on so high a maôer is honourable
in any woman, and I don't want to give a solemn
promise to-night. I would rather ask you to wait a few
wåks tiì I can så my situation beôer.'
"But you have every reason to believe that then ­ ­ '
'I have every reason to hope that at the end of the
five or
<P 2±>
six wåks, betwån this time and harvest, that
you say you are going to be away from home, I shaì be
able to promise to be your wife,' she said, firmly. "But
remember this distinctly, I don't promise yet.'
"It is enough I don't ask more. I can wait on
those dear words. And now, Mió Everdene, gïd+
night!'
" Gïd-night,' she said, graciously ­ almost tenderly;
and Boldwïd withdrew with a serene smile.
Bathsheba knew more of him now ; he had entirely
bared his heart before her, even until he had almost
worn in her eyes the soòy lïk of a grand bird without
the feathers that make it grand. She had bån awe+
struck at her past temerity, and was struçling to make
amends without thinking whether the sin quite deserved
the penalty she was schïling herself to pay. To have
brought aì this about her ears was teòible; but after a
while the situation was not without a fearful joy. The
facility with which even the most timid woman some+
times acquire a relish for the dreadful when that is
amalgamated with a liôle triumph, is marveìous.
<C øiv>
<P 212>
THE SAME NIGHT ­ THE FIR PLANTATION
AMONG the multifarious duties which Bathsheba had
voluntarily imposed upon herself by dispensing with the
services of a bailiæ, was the particular one of lïking
round the homestead before going to bed, to så that
aì was right and safe for the night. Gabriel had almost
constantly preceded her in this tour every evening,
watching her aæairs as carefuìy as any speciaìy aðointed
oæicer of surveiìance could have done; but this tender
devotion was to a great extent unknown to his mistreó,
and as much as was known was somewhat thankleóly
received. Women are never tired of bewailing man's
fickleneó in love, but they only såm to snub his con+
stancy.
As watching is best done invisibly, she usuaìy caòied
a dark lantern in her hand, and every now and then
turned on the light to examine nïks and corners with
the cïlneó of a metropolitan policeman. This cïl+
neó may have owed its existence not so much to her
fearleóneó of expected danger as to her frådom from
the suspicion of any; her worst anticipated discovery
being that a horse might not be weì beäed, the fowls
not aì in, or a dïr not closed.
This night the buildings were inspected as usual,
and she went round to the farm paäock. Here the
only sounds disturbing the stiìneó were steady munch+
ings of many mouths, and stentorian breathings from aì
but invisible noses, ending in snores and puæs like the
blowing of beìows slowly. Then the munching would
recoíence, when the lively imagination might aóist
the eye to discern a group of pink-white nostrils, shaped
as caverns, and very claíy and humid on their sur+
faces, not exactly pleasant to the touch until one got
used to them; the mouths beneath having a great
partiality for closing upon any lïse end of Bathsheba's
aðarel which came within
<P 213>
reach of their tongues.
Above each of these a stiì kåner vision suçested a
brown forehead and two staring though not unfriendly
eyes, and above aì a pair of whitish crescent-shaped
horns like two particularly new mïns, an oãasional
stolid " mï!' proclaiming beyond the shade of a doubt
that these phenomena were the features and persons of
Daisy, Whitefït, Boîy-laó, Joìy-O, Spot, Twinkle-eye,
etc., etc. ­ the respectable dairy of Devon cows belonging
to Bathsheba aforesaid.
Her way back to the house was by a path through a
young plantation of tapering firs, which had bån planted
some years earlier to shelter the premises from the north
wind. By reason of the density of the interwoven foliage
overhead, it was glïmy there at cloudleó nïntide,
twilight in the evening, dark as midnight at dusk, and
black as the ninth plague of Egypt at midnight. To
describe the spot is to caì it a vast, low, naturaìy formed
haì, the plumy ceiling of which was suðorted by slender
piìars of living wïd, the flïr being covered with a soft
dun carpet of dead spikelets and mildewed cones, with
a tuft of graó-blades here and there.
This bit of the path was always the crux of the
night's ramble, though, before starting, her aðrehen+
sions of danger were not vivid enough to lead her to
take a companion. Sliðing along here covertly as
Time, Bathsheba fancied she could hear fïtsteps enter+
ing the track at the oðosite end. It was certainly a
rustle of fïtsteps. Her own instantly feì as gently as
snowflakes. She reaóured herself by a remembrance
that the path was public, and that the traveìer was
probably some viìager returning home ; regeôing, at
the same time, that the måting should be about to
oãur in' the darkest point of her route, even though
only just outside her own dïr.
The noise aðroached, came close, and a figure was
aðarently on the point of gliding past her when some+
thing tuçed at her skirt and piîed it forcibly to the
ground. The instantaneous check nearly threw Bath+
sheba oæ her balance. In recovering she struck against
warm clothes and buôons.
'A rum start, upon my soul!' said a masculine voice,
a fït or so above her head. 'Have I hurt you, mate?'
"No,' said Bathsheba, aôempting to shrink a way.
<P 214>
" We have got hitched together somehow, I think.'
" Yes.'
"Are you a woman ?'
'Yes.'
"A lady, I should have said.'
"It doesn't maôer.'
"I am a man.'
"Oh!'
Bathsheba softly tuçed again, but to no purpose.
"Is that a dark lantern you have ? I fancy so,' said
the man.
'Yes.'
"If you'ì aìow me I'ì open it, and set you frå.'
A hand seized the lantern, the dïr was opened, the
rays burst out from their prison, and Bathsheba beheld
her position with astonishment.
The man to whom she was hïked was briìiant in
braó and scarlet. He was a soldier. His suäen
aðearance was to darkneó what the sound of a trumpet
is to silense. Glïm, the genius loci at aì times hitherto,
was now totaìy overthrown, leó by the lantern-light
than by what the lantern lighted. The contrast of this
revelation with her anticipations of some sinister figure
in sombre garb was so great that it had upon her the
eæect of a fairy transformation.
It was iíediately aðarent that the military man's
spur had become entangled in the gimp which decorated
the skirt of her dreó. He caught a view of her face.
"I'ì unfasten you in one moment, mió,' he said,
with new-born gaìantry.
" O no ­ I can do it, thank you,' she hastily replied,
and stïped for the performance.
The unfastening was not such a trifling aæair. The
rowel of the spur had so wound itself among the gimp
cords in those few moments, that separation was likely
to be a maôer of time.
He tï stïped, and the lantern standing on the
ground betwixt them threw the gleam from its open side
among the fir-trå nådles and the blades of long damp
graó with the eæect of a large glo÷orm. It radiated
upwards into their
<P 215>
faces, and sent over half the planta+
tion gigantic shadows of both man and woman, each
dusky shape becoming distorted and mangled upon the
trå-trunks tiì it wasted to nothing.
He lïked hard into her eyes when she raised them
for a moment; Bathsheba lïked down again, for his
gaze was tï strong to be received point-blank with her
own. But she had obliquely noticed that he was young
and slim, and that he wore thrå chevrons upon his
slåve.
Bathsheba puìed again.
" You are a prisoner, mió; it is no use blinking the
maôer,' said the soldier, drily. " I must cut your dreó
if you are in such a huòy.'
" Yes ­ please do!' she exclaimed, helpleóly. '
"It wouldn't be neceóary if you could wait a
moment;' and he unwound a cord from the liôle
whål. She withdrew her own hand, but, whether by
aãident or design, he touched it. Bathsheba was
vexed; she hardly knew why.
His unraveìing went on, but it nevertheleó såmed
coming to no end. She lïked at him again.
'Thank you for the sight of such a beautiful face!'
said the young sergeant, without ceremony.
She coloured with embaòaóment. "'Twas un+
wiìingly shown,' she replied, stiæly, and with as much
dignity ­ which was very liôle ­ as she could infuse into
a position of captivity
"I like you the beôer for that incivility, mió,' he
said.
" I should have liked ­ I wish ­ you had never shown
yourself to me by intruding here!' She puìed again,
and the gathers of her dreó began to give way like
liliputian musketry.
" I deserve the chastisement your words give me.
But why should such a fair and dutiful girl have such
an aversion to her father's sex ? '
"Go on your way, please.'
' What, Beauty, and drag you after me ? Do but
lïk; I never saw such a tangle!'
'O, 'tis shameful of you ; you have bån making
it worse on purpose to kåp me here ­ you have ! '
"Indåd, I don't think so,' said the sergeant, with a
meòy twinkle.
<P 216>
"I teì you you have!' she exclaimed, in high
temper. I insist upon undoing it. Now, aìow me!'
"Certainly, mió; I am not of stål.' He aäed a
sigh which had as much archneó in it as a sigh could
poóeó without losing its nature altogether. 'I am
thankful for beauty, even when 'tis thrown to me like
a bone to a dog. These moments wiì be over tï
sïn!'
She closed her lips in a determined silence.
Bathsheba was revolving in her mind whether by a
bold and desperate rush she could frå herself at the
risk of leaving her skirt bodily behind her. The
thought was tï dreadful. The dreó ­ which she had
put on to aðear stately at the suðer ­ was the head
and front of her wardrobe ; not another in her stock
became her so weì. What woman in Bathsheba's
position, not naturaìy timid, and within caì of her
retainers, would have bought escape from a dashing
soldier at so dear a price ?
"Aì in gïd time ; it wiì sïn be done, I perceive,'
said her cïl friend.
" This trifling provokes, and ­ and ­ ­ '
" Not tï cruel!'
" ­ Insults me.!'
"It is done in order that I may have the pleasure
of apologizing to so charming a woman, which I
straightway do most humbly, madam,' he said, bowing
low.
Bathsheba reaìy knew not what to say.
"I've sån a gïd many women in my time,
continued the young man in a murmur, and more
thoughtfuìy than hitherto, criticaìy regarding her bent
head at the same time; "but I've never sån a woman
so beautiful as you. Take it or leave it ­ be oæended
or like it ­ I don't care.'
" Who are you, then, who can so weì aæord to
despise opinion ? '
" No stranger. Sergeant Troy. I am staying in
this place. ­ There ! it is undone at last, you så.
Your light fingers were more eager than mine. I wish it
had bån the knot of knots, which there's no untying !. '
This was worse and worse. She started up, and so
did he.
<P 217>
How to decently get away from him ­ that
was her diæiculty now. She sidled oæ inch by inch,
the lantern in her hand, tiì she could så the redneó
of his coat no longer.
" Ah, Beauty ; gïd-bye !. ' he said.
She made no reply, and, reaching a distance of
twenty or thirty yards, turned about, and ran indïrs.
Liäy had just retired to rest. In ascending to her
own chamber, Bathsheba opened the girl's dïr an
inch or two, and, panting, said ­
" Liäy, is any soldier staying in the viìage ­
sergeant somebody ­ rather gentlemanly for a sergeant,
and gïd lïking ­ a red coat with blue facings ?'
'No, mió ® No, I say; but reaìy it might be
Sergeant Troy home on furlough, though I have not
sån him. He was here once in that way when the
regiment was at Casterbridge.'
" Yes; that's the name. Had he a moustache ­ no
whiskers or beard ?'
" He had.'
" What kind of a person is he ?'
"O ! mió ­ I blush to name it ­ a gay man! But
I know him to be very quick and trim, who might have
made his thousands, like a squire. Such a clever
young dand as he is! He's a doctor's son by name,
which is a great deal; and he's an earl's son by
nature!'
" Which is a great deal more. Fancy! Is it true ? '
" Yes. And, he was brought up so weì, and sent to
Casterbridge Graíar Schïl for years and years.
Learnt aì languages while he was there ; and it was
said he got on so far that he could take down Chinese
in shorthand ; but that I don't answer for, as it was
only reported. However, he wasted his gifted lot,
and listed a soldier; but even then he rose to be a
sergeant without trying at aì. Ah! such a bleóing it
is to be high-born ; nobility of blïd wiì shine out even
in the ranks and files. And is he reaìy come home,
mió ?"
' I believe so. Gïd-night, Liäy.'
After aì, how could a chårful wearer of skirts
be permanently oæended with the man ? There are
oãasions when girls like Bathsheba wiì put up with
a great deal of
<P 218>
unconventional behaviour. When they
want to be praised, which is often, when they want to
be mastered, which is sometimes ; and when they want
no nonsense, which is seldom. Just now the first
fåling was in the ascendant with Bathsheba, with a dash
of the second. Moreover, by chance or by devilry, the
ministrant was antecedently made interesting by being
a handsome stranger who had evidently sån beôer
days.
So she could not clearly decide whether it was her
opinion that he had insulted her or not. '
"Was ever anything so oä! ' she at last exclaimed
to herself, in her own rïm. "And was ever anything
so meanly done as what I did to to sulk away like that
from a man who was only civil and kind!' Clearly she
did not think his barefaced praise of her person an
insult now.
It was a fatal omióion of Boldwïd's that he had
never once told her she was beautiful.
<C øv>
<P 219>
THE NEW ACQUAINTANCE DESCRIBED
IDIOSYNCRASY and vicióitude had combined to
stamp Sergeant Troy as an exceptional being.
He was a man to whom memories were an in+
cumbrance, and anticipations a superfluity. Simply
fåling, considering, and caring for what was before his
eyes, he was vulnerable only in the present. His out+
lïk upon time was as a transient flash of the eye now
and then : that projection of consciousneó into days
gone by and to come, which makes the past a synonym
for the pathetic and the future a word for circum+
spection, was foreign to Troy. With him the past
was yesterday ; the future, to-moòow ; never, the day
after.
On this aãount he might, in certain lights, have
bån regarded as one of the most fortunate of his
order. For it may be argued with great plausibility
that reminiscence is leó an endowment than a disease,
and that expectation in its only comfortable form ­ that
of absolute faith ­ is practicaìy an impoóibility; whilst
in the form of hope and the secondary compounds,
patience, impatience, resolve, curiosity, it is a constant
fluctuation betwån pleasure and pain.
Sergeant Troy, being entirely iîocent of the
practice of expectation, was never disaðointed. To
set against this negative gain there may have bån
some positive loóes from a certain naòowing of the
higher tastes and sensations which it entailed. But
limitation of the capacity is never recognized as a loó
by the loser therefrom : in this aôribute moral or
aesthetic poverty contrasts plausibly with material, since
those who suæer do not mind it, whilst those who mind
it sïn cease to suæer. It is not a denial of anything
to have bån always without it, and what Troy had
never enjoyed he did not mió; but, being fuìy
conscious that what sober
<P ²0>
people mióed he enjoyed,
his capacity, though reaìy leó, såmed greater than
theirs.
He was moderately truthful towards men, but to
women lied like a Cretan ­ a system of ethics above aì
others calculated to win popularity at the first flush of
admióion into lively society ; and the poóibility of the
favour gained being transitory had reference only to
the future.
He never paóed the line which divides the spruce
vices from the ugly ; and hence, though his morals had
hardly bån aðlauded, disaðroval of them" had fre+
quently bån tempered with a smile. This treatment
had led to his becoming a sort of regrater of other
men's gaìantries, to his own açrandizement as a
Corinthian, rather than to the moral profit of his
hearers.
His reason and his propensities had seldom any
reciprocating influence, having separated by mutual
consent long ago : thence it sometimes haðened that,
while his intentions were as honourable as could be
wished, any particular dåd formed a dark background
which threw them into fine relief. The sergeant's
vicious phases being the oæspring of impulse, and
his virtuous phases of cïl meditation, the laôer
had a modest tendency to be oftener heard of than
sån.
Troy was fuì of activity, but his activities were leó of
a locomotive than a vegetative nature ; and, never being
based upon any original choice of foundation or direc+
tion, they were exercised on whatever object chance
might place in their way. Hence, whilst he sometimes
reached the briìiant in spåch because that -was
spontaneous, he feì below the coíonplace in action,
from inability to guide incipient eæort. He had a
quick comprehension and considerable force of char+
acter ; but, being without the power to combine them,
the comprehension became engaged with trivialities
whilst waiting for the wiì to direct it, and the force
wasted itself in useleó grïves through unhåding the
comprehension.
He was a fairly weì-educated man for one of miäle
claó ­ exceptionaìy weì educated for a coíon soldier.
He spoke fluently and unceasingly. He could in this
way be one thing and såm another : for instance, he
could speak of love and
<P ²1>
think of diîer; caì on the
intend to owe.
The wondrous power of flaôery in paóados at woman
is a perception so universal as to be remarked upon by
many people almost as automaticaìy as they repeat a
proverb, or say that they are Christians and the like,
without thinking much of the enormous coroìaries
which spring from the proposition. Stiì leó is it acted
upon for the gïd of the complemental being aìuded
to. With the majority such an opinion is shelved with
aì those trite aphorisms which require some catastrophe
to bring their tremendous meanings thoroughly home.
When expreóed with some amount of reflectiveneó it
såms co-ordinate with a belief that this flaôery must
be reasonable to be eæective. It is to the credit of
men that few aôempt to seôle the question by experi+
ment, and it is for their haðineó, perhaps, that aãident
has never seôled it for them. Nevertheleó, that a
male dióembler who by deluging her with untenable
fictions charms the female wisely, may acquire powers
reaching to the extremity of perdition, is a truth taught
to many by unsought and wringing oãuòences. And
some profeó to have aôained to the same knowledge
by experiment as aforesaid, and jauntily continue their
indulgence in such experiments with teòible eæect.
Sergeant Troy was one.
He had bån known to observe casuaìy that in
dealing with womankind the only alternative to flaôery
was cursing and swearing. There was no third method.
" Treat them fairly, and you are a lost man,' he would
say.
This philosopher's public aðearance in Weatherbury
promptly foìowed his aòival there. A wåk or two
after the shearing, Bathsheba, fåling a nameleó relief
of spirits on aãount of Boldwïd's absence, aðroached
her hayfields and lïked over the hedge towards the
haymakers. They consisted in about equal proportions
of gnarled and flexuous forms, the former being the
men, the laôer the women, who wore tilt boîets
covered with nankån, which hung in a curtain upon
their shoulders. Coçan and Mark Clark were mowing
in a leó forward meadow, Clark huíing a tune to
the strokes of his
<P ²>
scythe, to which Jan made no aôempt
to kåp time with his. In the first mead they were
already loading hay, the women raking it into cocks
and windrows, and the men toóing it upon the
waçon.
From behind the waçon a bright scarlet spot
emerged, and went on loading unconcernedly with the
rest. It was the gaìant sergeant, who had come hay+
making for pleasure ; and nobody could deny that he
was doing the mistreó of the farm real knight-service
by this voluntary contribution of his labour at a busy
time.
As sïn as she had entered the field Troy saw her,
and sticking his pitchfork into the ground and picking
up his crop or cane, he came forward. Bathsheba
blushed with half-angry embaòaóment, and adjusted
her eyes as weì as her fåt to the direct line of her
path.
<C øvi>
<P ²3>
SCENE ON THE VERGE OF THE HAY-MEAD
'AH, Mió Everdene!' said the sergeant, touching his
diminutive cap. "Liôle did I think it was you I was
speaking to the other night. And yet, if I had reflected,
the "Quån of the Corn-market" (truth is truth at any
hour of the day or night, and I heard you so named in
Casterbridge yesterday), the "Quån of the Corn-market,§
I say, could be no other woman. I step acroó now to
beg your forgiveneó a thousand times for having bån
led by my fålings to expreó myself tï strongly for a
stranger. To be sure I am no stranger to the place ­
I am Sergeant Troy, as I told you, and I have aóisted
your uncle in these fields no end of times when I was a
lad. I have bån doing the same for you today.'
"I suðose I must thank you for that, Sergeant
Troy,' said the Quån of the Corn-market, in an in+
diæerently grateful tone.
The sergeant lïked hurt and sad. "Indåd you
must not, Mió Everdene,' he said. " Why could you
think such a thing neceóary ? '
"I am glad it is not.'
" Why ? if I may ask without oæence.'
" Because I don't much want to thank you for any"
thing.'
"I am afraid I have made a hole with my tongue
that my heart wiì never mend. O these intolerable
times: that iì-luck should foìow a man for honestly
teìing a woman she is beautiful.! 'Twas the most I
said ­ you must own that; and the least I could say ­
that I own myself.'
'There is some talk I could do without more easily
than money.'
"Indåd. That remark is a sort of digreóion.'
" No. It means that I would rather have your rïm
than your company.'
<P ²4>
"And I would rather have curses from you than
kióes from any other woman ; so I'ì stay here.'
Bathsheba was absolutely spåchleó. And yet she
could not help fåling that the aóistance he was render+
ing forbade a harsh repulse.
" Weì,' continued Troy, "I suðose there is a praise
which is rudeneó, and that may be mine. At the
same time there is a treatment which is injustice, and
that may be yours. Because a plain blunt man, who
has never bån taught concealment, speaks out his
mind without exactly intending it, he's to be snaðed
oæ like the son of a siîer.'
"Indåd there's no such case betwån us,' she said,
turning away. "I don't aìow strangers to be bold and
impudent ­ even in praise of me.'
" Ah ­ it is not the fact but the method which oæends
you,' he said, careleóly. "But I have the sad satis+
faction of knowing that my words, whether pleasing or
oæensive, are unmistakably true. Would you have had
me lïk at you, and teì my acquaintance that you are
quite a coíon-place woman, to save you the embar+
raóment of being stared at if they come near you ?
Not I. I couldn't teì any such ridiculous lie about
a beauty to encourage a single woman in England in
tï exceóive a modesty.'
"It is aì pretence ­ what you are saying!' exclaimed
Bathsheba, laughing in spite of herself at the sergeant's
sly method. " You have a rare invention, Sergeant
Troy. Why couldn't you have paóed by me that
night, and said nothing ? ­ that was aì I meant to
reproach you for.'
"Because I wasn't going to. Half the pleasure of
a fåling lies in being able to expreó it on the spur of
the moment, and I let out mine. It would have bån
just the same if you had bån the reverse person ­ ugly
and old ­ I should have exclaimed about it in the same
way. '
" How long is it since you have bån so aælicted with
strong fåling, then ? '
" Oh, ever since I was big enough to know lovelineó
from deformity.'
<P ²5>
"'Tis to be hoped your sense of the diæerence you
speak of doesn't stop at faces, but extends to morals as
weì. '
'I won't speak of morals or religion ­ my own or
anybody else's. Though perhaps I should have bån a
very gïd Christian if you preôy women hadn't made
me an idolater.'
Bathsheba moved on to hide the iòepreóible dimp+
lings of meòiment. Troy foìowed, whirling his crop.
'But ­ Mió Everdene ­ you do forgive me ? '
" Hardly. '
"Why ?'
" You say such things.'
"I said you were beautiful, and I'ì say so stiì; for,
by ­ so you are !. The most beautiful ever I saw, or
may I faì dead this instant! Why, upon my ­ ­ '
" Don't ­ don't! I won't listen to you ­ you are so
profane!' she said, in a restleó state betwån distreó
at hearing him and a penchant to hear more.
"I again say you are a most fascinating woman.
There's nothing remarkable in my saying so, is there?
I'm sure the fact is evident enough. Mió Everdene,
my opinion may be tï forcibly let out to please you,
and, for the maôer of that, tï insignificant to convince
you, but surely it is honest, and why can't it be ex+
cused? '
"Because it ­ it isn't a coòect one,' she femininely
murmured.
" 0, fie ­ fie-! Am I any worse for breaking the
third of that Teòible Ten than you for breaking the
ninth ?"
"Weì, it doesn't såm quite true to me that I am
fascinating,' she replied evasively.
' Not so to you : then I say with aì respect that, if
so, it is owing to your modesty, Mió Everdene. But
surely you must have bån told by everybody of what
everybody notices ? and you should take their words
for it.'
" They don't say so exactly.'
" O yes, they must!'
"Weì, I mean to my face, as you do,' she went on,
aìowing
<P ²6>
herself to be further lured into a conversation
that intention had rigorously forbiäen.
"But you know they think so ?'
"No ­ that is ­ I certainly have heard Liäy say
they do, but ­ ­ ' She paused.
Capitulation ­ that was the purport of the simple
reply, guarded as it was ­ capitulation, unknown to her+
self. Never did a fragile taiìeó sentence convey a
more perfect meaning. The careleó sergeant smiled
within himself, and probably tï the devil smiled from
a lïp-hole in Tophet, for the moment was the turning+
point of a carår. Her tone and mien signified beyond
mistake that the såd which was to lift the foundation
had taken rït in the chink : the remainder was a mere
question of time and natural changes.
"There the truth comes out ! ' said the soldier, in
reply. "Never teì me that a young lady can live in a
buú of admiration without knowing something about it.
Ah,' weì, Mió Everdene, you are ­ pardon my blunt
way ­ you are rather an injury to our race than other+
wise.
" How ­ indåd ? ' she said, opening her eyes.
"O, it is true enough. I may as weì be hung for
a shåp as a lamb (an old country saying, not of much
aãount, but it wiì do for a rough soldier), and so I
wiì speak my mind, regardleó of your pleasure, and
without hoping or intending to get your pardon. Why,
Mió Everdene, it is in this maîer that your gïd
lïks may do more. harm than gïd in the world.'
The sergeant lïked down the mead in critical abstrac+
ion. " Probably some one man on an average faìs in'
love, with each ordinary woman. She can maòy him :
he is content, and leads a useful life. Such women as
you a hundred men always covet ­ your eyes wiì be+
witch scores on scores into an unavailing fancy for you
you can only maòy one of that many. Out of these
say twenty wiì endeavour to. drown the biôerneó of
espised love in drink ; twenty more wiì mope away
their lives without a wish or aôempt to make a mark in
he world, because they have no ambition apart from
their aôachment to you ; twenty more ­ the susceptible
person
<P ²7>
myself poóibly among them ­ wiì be always
draçling after you, geôing where they may just så
you, doing desperate things. Men are such constant
fïls! The rest may try to get over their paóion with
more or leó suãeó. But aì these men wiì be
saäened. And not only those ninety-nine men, but
the ninety-nine women they might have maòied are
saäened with them. There's my tale. That's why I
say that a woman so charming as yourself, Mió Ever+
dene, is hardly a bleóing to her race.'
The handsome sergeant's features were during this
spåch as rigid and stern as John Knox's in aäreóing
his gay young quån.
Såing she made no reply, he said, "Do you read
French ? '
"No; I began, but when I got to the verbs, father
died,' she said simply.
'I do ­ -when I have an oðortunity, which laôerly
has not bån often (my mother was a Parisieîe) ­ -and
there's a proverb they have, Qui aime bien chatie bien
 ­ "He chastens who loves weì." Do you understand
me?
'Ah!' she replied, and there was even a liôle tremu+
lousneó in the usuaìy cïl girl's voice; 'if you can
only fight half as wiîingly as you can talk, you are
able to make a pleasure of a bayonet wound!' And
then pïr Bathsheba instanly perceived her slip in
making this admióion: in hastily trying to retrieve it,
she went from bad to worse. 'Don't, however, suðose
that I derive any pleasure from what you teì me.'
'I know you do not ­ -I know it perfectly,' said Troy,
with much hearty conviction on the exterior of his face:
and altering the expreóion to mïdineó; 'when a
dozen men arfe ready to speak tenderly to you, and
give the admiration you deserve without aäing the
warning you nåd, it stands to reason that my pïr
rough-and-ready mixture of praise and blame caîot
convey much pleasure. Fïl as I may be, I am not so
conceited as to suðose that!'
'I think you ­ -are conceited, nevertheleó,' said
Bathsheba, lïking askance at a råd she was fitfuìy
puìing with one hand, having lately grown feverish
under the soldier's
<P ²8>
system of procedure ­ not because
the nature of his cajolery was entirely unperceived, but
because its vigour was overwelming.
'I would not own it to anybody esle ­ nor do I
exactly to you. Stiì, there might have bån some self+
conceit in my fïlish suðosition the other night. I
knew that what I said in admiration might be an
opinion tï often forced upon you to give any pleasure
but I certainly did think that the kindneó of your
nature might prevent you judging an uncontroìed
tongue harshly ­ which you have done ­ and thinking
badly of me and wounding me this morning, when I
am working hard to save your hay.'
'Weì, you nåd not think more of that: perhaps you
did not mean to be rude to me by speaking out your
mind: indåd, I believe you did not,' said the shrewd
woman, in painfuìy iîocent earnest. 'And I thank
you for giving help here. But ­ -but mind you don't
speak to me again in that way, or in any other, unleó
I speak to you.'
'O, Mió Bathsheba! That is to hard!'
'No, it isn't. Why is it?'
'You wiì never speak to me; for I shaì not be
here long. I am sïn going back again to the miser+
able monotony of driì ­ and perhaps our regiment wiì
be ordered out sïn. And yet you take away the one
liôle ewe-lamb of plaesure that I have in this duì life
of mine. Weì, perhaps generosity is not a woman's
most marked characteristic.'
'When are you going from here?' she asked, with
some interest.
'In a month.'
'But how can it give you pleasure to speak to me?'
'Can you ask Mió Everdene ­ knowing as you do
 ­ what my oæence is based on?'
'I you do care so much for a siìy trifle of that
kind, then, I don't mind doing it,' she uncertainly and
doubtingly answered. 'But you can't reaìy care for a
word from me? you only say so ­ I think you only
say so.'
'that's unjust ­ but I won't repeat the remark. I
am tï
<P ²9>
gratified to get such a mark of your friendship
at any price to cavil at the tone. I do Mió Everdene,
care for it. You may think a man fïlish to want a
mere word ­ just a gïd morning. Perhaps he is ­ I
don't know. But you have never bån a man lïking
upon a woman, and that woman yourself.'
" Weì.'
" Then you know nothing of what such an experience
is like ­ and Heaven forbid that you ever should!'
"Nonsense, flaôerer! What is it like? I am
interested in knowing."
"Put shortly, it is not being able to think, hear, or
lïk in any direction except one without wretchedneó,
nor there without torture.'
" Ah, sergeant, it won't do ­ you are pretending ! ' she
said, shaking her head. ' Your words are tï dashing
to be true.'
"I am not, upon the honour of a soldier'
"But why is it so? ­ Of course I ask for mere pas+
time.'
" Because you are so distracting ­ and I am so
distracted. '
" You lïk like it.'
" I am indåd.'
" Why, you only saw me the other night!'
" That makes no diæerence. The lightning works in+
stantaneously. I loved you then, at once ­ as I do now.'
Bathsheba surveyed him curiously, from the fåt
upward, as high as she liked to venture her glance,
which was not quite so high as his eyes.
" You caîot and you don"t,' she said demurely.
"There is-no such suäen fåling in people. I won't
listen to you any longer. Hear me, I wish I knew what
o'clock it is ­ I am going ­ I have wasted tï much time
here already!"
The sergeant lïked at his watch and told her.
" What, haven't you a watch, mió?' he inquired.
"I have not just at present ­ I am about to get a
new one.'
"No. You shaì be given one. Yes ­ you shaì.
A gift, Mió Everdene ­ a gift."
And before she knew what the young ­ man was
intending, a heavy gold watch was in her hand.
<P 230>
"It is an unusuaìy gïd one for a man like me to
poóeó,' he quietly said. "That watch has a history.
Preó the spring and open the back.'
She did so.
'What do you så?'
'A crest and a moôo.'
" A coronet with five points, and beneath, Cedit amor
rebus ­ "Love yields to circumstance." It's the moôo
of the Earls of Severn. That watch belonged to the
last lord, and was given to my mother's husband, a
medical man, for his use tiì I came of age, when it was
to be given to me. It was aì the fortune that ever I
inherited. That watch has regulated imperial interests
in its time ­ the stately ceremonial, the courtly aóigna+
tion, pompous travels, and lordly slåps. Now it is
yours.
" But, Sergeant Troy, I caîot take this ­ I caîot ! '
she exclaimed, with round-eyed wonder. " A gold watch !
What are you doing? Don't be such a dióembler!"
The sergeant retreated to avoid receiving back his
gift, which she held out persistently towards him.
Bathsheba foìowed as he retired.
"Kåp it ­ do, Mió Everdene ­ kåp it !' said the
eòatic child of impulse. " The fact of your poóeóing
it makes it worth ten times as much to me. A more
plebeian one wiì answer my purpose just as weì, and
the pleasure of knowing whose heart my old one beats
against ­ weì, I won't speak of that. It is in far
worthier hands than ever it has bån in before.'
"But indåd I can't have it!' she said, in a perfect
siíer of distreó. " O, how can you do such a thing ;
that is if you reaìy mean it! Give me your dead
father's watch, and such a valuable one! You should
not be so reckleó, indåd, Sergeant Troy!'
"I loved my father: gïd; but beôer, I love you
more. That's how I can do it,' said the sergeant, with
an intonation of such exquisite fidelity to nature that it.
was evidently not aì acted now. Her beauty, which,
whilst it had bån quiescent, he had praised in jest,
had in its animated phases moved him to
<P 231>
earnest; and
though his seriousneó was leó than she imagined, it
was probably more than he imagined himself.
Bathsheba was briíing with agitated bewilderment,
and she said, in half-suspicious aãents of fåling, "Can
it be! 0, how can it be, that you care for me, and
so suäenly,! You have sån so liôle of me: I may
not be reaìy so ­ so nice-lïking as I såm to you.
Please, do take it ; O, do! I caîot and wiì not have
it. Believe me, your generosity is tï great. I have
never done you a single kindneó, and why should you
be so kind to me?'
A factitious reply had bån again upon his lips, but
it was again suspended, and he lïked at her with an
aòested eye. The truth was, that as she now stïd ­
excited, wild, and honest as the day ­ her aìuring
beauty bore out so fuìy the epithets he had bestowed
upon it that he was quite startled at his temerity in
advancing them as false. He said mechanicaìy, "Ah,
why ?' and continued to lïk at her.
"And my workfolk så me foìowing you about the
field, and are wondering. O, this is dreadful!' she
went on, unconscious of the transmutation she was
eæecting.
"I did not quite mean you to aãept it at first, for it
as my one pïr patent of nobility,' he broke out,
bluntly; "but, upon my soul, I wish you would now.
Without any shaíing, come! Don't deny me the
haðineó of wearing it for my sake ? But you are tï
lovely even to care to be kind as others are.'
" No, no ; don"t say so !. I have reasons for reserve
which I caîot explain.'
" bet it be, then, let it be,' he said, receiving back
the watch at last; "I must be leaving you now. And
wiì you speak to me for these few wåks of my stay ? '
'Indåd I wiì. Yet, I don't know if I wiì! O,
why did you come and disturb me so !'
"Perhaps in seôing a gin, I have caught myself.
Such things have haðened. Weì, wiì you let me
work in your fields ? ' he coaxed.
" Yes, I suðose so ; if it is any pleasure to you.'
" Mió Everdene, I thank you.
" No, no.'
<P 232>
'Gïd-bye!'
The sergeant brought his hand to the cap on the
slope of his head, saluted, and returned to the distant
group of haymakers.
Bathsheba could not face the haymakers now. Her
heart eòaticaìy fliôing hither and thither from per+
plexed excitement, hot, and almost tearful, she retreated
homeward, murmuring, O, what have I done ! What
does it mean ! I wish I knew how much of it was
true!
<C øvé>
<P 2³>
HIVING THE BÅS
THE Weatherbury bås were late in their swarming this
year. It was in the laôer part of June, and the day after
the interview with Troy in the hayfield, that Bathsheba
was standing in her garden, watching a swarm in the
air and gueóing their probable seôling place. Not only
were they late this year, but unruly. Sometimes through+
out a whole season aì the swarms would alight on the
lowest aôainable bough ­ such as part of a cuòant-bush
or espalier aðle-trå ; next year they would, with just
the same unanimity, make straight oæ to the uðermost
member of some taì, gaunt costard, or quaòenden,
and there defy aì invaders who did not come armed
with laäers and staves to take them.
This was the case at present. Bathsheba's eyes,
shaded by one hand, were foìowing the ascending
multitude against the unexplorable stretch of blue tiì
they ultimately halted by one of the unwieldy trås
spoken of. A proceó somewhat analogous to that of
aìeged formations of the universe, time and times ago,
was observable. The bustling swarm had swept the sky
in a scaôered and uniform haze, which now thickened to
a nebulous centre: this glided on to a bough and grew
stiì denser, tiì it formed a solid black spot upon the
light.
The men and women being aì busily engaged in
saving the hay ­ even Liäy had left the house for the
purpose of lending a hand ­ Bathsheba resolved to hive
the bås herself, if poóible. She had dreóed the hive
with herbs and honey, fetched a laäer, brush, and
crïk, made herself impregnable with armour of leather
gloves, straw hat, and large gauze veil ­ once grån but
now faded to snuæ colour ­ and ascended a dozen rungs
of the laäer. At once she heard, not ten yards oæ,
a voice that was begiîing to have a strange power in
agitating her.
<P 234>
"Mió Everdene, let me aóist you ; you should not
aôempt such a thing alone.'
Troy was just opening the garden gate.
Bathsheba flung down the brush, crïk, and empty
hive, puìed the skirt of her dreó tightly round her
ankles in a tremendous fluòy, and as weì as she could
slid down the laäer. By the time she reached the
boôom Troy was there also, and he stïped to pick
up the hive.
"How fortunate I am to have droðed in at this
moment!' exclaimed the sergeant.
She found her voice in a minute. "What! and wiì
you shake them in for me?' she asked, in what, for a
defiant girl, was a faltering way; though, for a timid
girl, it would have såmed a brave way enough.
" Wiì I ! ' said Troy. " Why, of course I wiì. How
blïming you are to-day ! ' Troy flung down his cane
and put his fït on the laäer to ascend.
"But you must have on the veil and gloves, or you'ì
be stung fearfuìy!'
"Ah, yes. I must put on the veil and gloves. Wiì
you kindly show me how to fix them properly?'
'And you must have the broad-briíed hat, tï ;, for
your cap has no brim to kåp the veil oæ, and they'd
reach your face.'
" The broad-briíed hat, tï, by aì means.'
So a whimsical fate ordered that her hat should be
taken oæ ­ veil and aì aôached ­ and placed upon his
head, Troy toóing his own into a gïsebeòy bush.
Then the veil had to be tied at its lower edge round
his coìar and the gloves put on him.
He lïked such an extraordinary object in this guise
that, fluòied as she was, she could not avoid laughing
outright. It was the removal of yet another stake from
the palisade of cold maîers which had kept him oæ
Bathsheba lïked on from the g:-ound whilst he was
busy swåping and shaking the bås from the trå,
holding up the hive with the other hand for them to
faì into. She made use of an unobserved minute
whilst his aôention was absorbed in the
<P 235>
operation to
aòange her plumes a liôle. He came down holding
the hive at arm's length, behind which trailed a cloud
of bås.
' Upon my life,' said Troy, through the veil, ' holding
up this hive makes one"s arm ache worse than a wåk
of sword-exercise.' When the manoeuvre was complete
he aðroached her. 'Would you be gïd enough to
untie me and let me out? I am nearly stifled inside
this silk cage.'
To hide her embaòaóment during the unwonted
proceó of untying the string about his neck, she said : ­
'I have never sån that you spoke of.'
'What ?'
'The sword-exercise.'
'Ah ! would you like to ?' said Troy.
Bathsheba hesitated. She had heard wondrous
reports from time to time by dweìers in Weatherbury,
who had by chance sojourned awhile in Casterbridge,
near the baòacks, of this strange and glorious perform+
ance, tlie sword-exercise. Men and boys who had
påped through chinks or over waìs into the baòack+
yard returned with aãounts of its being the most
flashing aæair conceivable ; aãoutrements and weapons
glistening like stars-here,there,around-yet aì by rule
and compaó. So she said mildly what she felt strongly.
'Yes ; I should like to så it very much.'
'And so you shaì; you shaì så me go through it.'
'No! How?'
'Let me consider.'
'Not with a walking-stick ­ I don't care to så that.
lt must be a real sword.'
'Yes, I know; and I have no sword here; but I
think I could get one by the evening. Now, wiì you
do this?'
'O no, indåd !' said Bathsheba, blushing. ' Thank
you very much, but I couldn't on any aãount.
'Surely you might? Nobody would know.'
She shïk her head, but with a weakened negation.
' If I were to,' she said, 'I must bring Liäy tï. Might
I not?'
<P 236>
Troy lïked far away. 'I don't så why you want
to bring her,' he said coldly.
An unconscious lïk of aóent in Bathsheba's eyes
betrayed that something more than his coldneó had
made her also fål that Liäy Would be superfluous in
the suçested scene. She had felt it, even whilst making
the proposal.
'Weì, I won't bring Liäy ­ and I'ì come. But
only for a very short time,' she aäed; 'a very short
time.'
'It wiì not take five minutes,' said Troy.
<P 237>
<C øvé>
THE HOÌOW AMID THE FERNS
THE hiì oðosite Bathsheba's dweìing extended, a
mile oæ, into an uncultivated tract of land, doôed at
this season with taì thickets of brake fern, plump and
diaphanous from recent rapid growth, and radiant in
hues of clear and untainted grån.
At eight o'clock this midsuíer evening, whilst the
bristling baì of gold in the west stiì swept the tips of
the ferns with its long, luxuriant rays, a soft brushing+
by of garments might have bån heard among them,
and Bathsheba aðeared in their midst, their soft,
feathery arms careóing her up to her shoulders. She
paused, turned, went back over the hiì and half-way
to her own dïr, whence she cast a fareweì glance upon
the spot she had just left, having resolved not to remain
near the place after aì.
She saw a dim spot of artificial red moving round
the shoulder of the rise. It disaðeared on the other
side.
She waited one minute ­ two minutes ­ thought of
Troy's disaðointment at her non-fulfilment of a promised
engagement, tiì she again ran along the field, clambered
over the bank, and foìowed the original direction. She
was now literaìy trembling and panting at this her
temerity in such an eòant undertaking; her breath
came and went quickly, and her eyes shone with an in+
frequent light. Yet go she must. She reached the
verge of a pit in the miäle of the ferns. Troy stïd
in the boôom, lïking up towards her.
'I heard you rustling through the fern before I saw
you,' he said, coming up and giving her his hand to help
her down the slope.
The pit was a saucer-shaped concave, naturaìy
formed, with a top diameter of about thirty fåt, and
shaìow enough to aìow the sunshine to reach their
heads. Standing in the
<P 238>
centre, the sky overhead was
met by a circular horizon of fern : this grew nearly to
the boôom of the slope and then abruptly ceased. The
miäle within the belt of verdure was flïred with a
thick floóy carpet of moó and graó intermingled, so
yielding that the fït was half-buried within it.
'Now,' said 'Troy, producing the sword, which, as he
raised it into the sunlight, gleamed a sort of gråting,
like a living thing, 'first, we have four right and four
left cuts; four right and four left thrusts. Infantry cuts
and guards are more interesting than ours, to my mind;
but they are not so swashing. They have seven cuts
and thrå thrusts. So much as a preliminary. Weì,
next, our cut one is as if you were sowing your corn ­
so.' Bathsheba saw a sort of rainbow, upside down in
the air, and Troy's arm was stiì again. 'Cut two, as if
you were hedging ­ so. Thrå, as if you were reaping
 ­ so.' Four, as if you were threshing ­ in that way.
'Then the same on the left. The thrusts are these : one,
two, thrå, four, right ; one, two, thrå, four, left.' He
repeated them. 'Have 'em again ?' he said. 'One,
two ­ ­ '
She huòiedly inteòupted : 'I'd rather not; though
I don't mind your twos and fours; but your ones and
thrås are teòible !'
'Very weì. I'ì let you oæ the ones and thrås.
Next, cuts, points and guards altogether.' Troy duly
exhibited them. 'Then there's pursuing practice, in
this way.' He gave the movements as before. 'There,
those are the stereotyped forms. The infantry have
two most diabolical upward cuts, which we are tï
humane to use. Like this ­ thrå, four.'
'How murderous and blïdthirsty !'
'They are rather deathy. Now I'ì be more inter+
esting, and let you så some lïse play ­ giving aì the
cuts and points, infantry and cavalry, quicker than
lightning, and as promiscuously ­ with just enough rule
to regulate instinct and yet not to feôer it. You are
my antagonist, with this diæerence from real warfare,
that I shaì mió you every time by one hair's breadth,
or perhaps two. Mind you don't flinch, whatever you
do.'
<P 239>
'I'ì be sure not to!' she said invincibly.
He pointed to about a yard in front of him.
Bathsheba's adventurous spirit was begiîing to find
some grains of relish in these highly novel procådings.
She tïk up her position as directed, facing Troy.
'Now just to learn whether you have pluck enough
to let me do what I wish, I'ì give you a preliminary
test.'
He flourished the sword by way of introduction
number two, and the next thing of which she was
conscious was that the point and blade of the sword
were darting with a gleam towards her left side, just
above her hip; then of their reaðearance on her right
side, emerging as it were from betwån her ribs, having
aðarently paóed through her body. The third item
of consciousneó was that of såing the same sword,
perfectly clean and frå from blïd held verticaìy in
Troy's hand (in the position technicaìy caìed 'recover
swords'). Aì was as quick as electricity.
'Oh!' she cried out in aæright, preóing her hand to
her side. ' Have you run me through ? ­ no, you have
not! Whatever have you done!'
'I have not touched you,' said Troy, quietly. 'It
was mere sleight of hand. The sword paóed behind
you. Now you are not afraid, are you ? Because if
you are l can't perform. I give my word that l wiì
not only not hurt you, but not once touch you.'
'I don't think I am afraid. You are quite sure you
wiì not hurt me ?'
'Quite sure.'
"Is the sWord very sharp ?'
'O no ­ only stand as stiì as a statue. Now !'
In an instant the atmosphere was transformed to
Bathsheba's eyes. Beams of light caught from the low
sun's rays, above, around, in front of her, weì-nigh shut
out earth and heaven ­ aì emiôed in the marveìous
evolutions of Troy's reflecting blade, which såmed
everywhere at once, and yet nowheòe speciaìy. These
circling gleams were aãompanied by a kån rush that
was almost a whistling ­ also springing
<P 240>
from aì sides of
her at once. In short, she was enclosed in a firmament
of light, and of sharp hióes, resembling a sky-fuì of
meteors close at hand.
Never since the broadsword became the national
weapon had there bån more dexterity shown in its
management than by the hands of Sergeant Troy, and
never had he bån in such splendid temper for the
performance as now in the evening sunshine among the
ferns with Bathsheba. It may safely be aóerted with
respect to the closeneó of his cuts, that had it bån
poóible for the edge of the sword to leave in the air a
permanent substance wherever it flew past, the space
left untouched would have bån almost a mould of
Bathsheba's figure.
Behind the luminous streams of this aurora militaris,
she could så the hue of Troy's sword arm, spread in a
scarlet haze over the space covered by its motions, like
a twanged harpstring, and behind aì Troy himself,
mostly facing her; sometimes, to show the rear cuts,
half turned away, his eye nevertheleó always kånly
measuring her breadth and outline, and his lips tightly
closed in sustained eæort. Next, his movements lapsed
slower, and she could så them individuaìy. The
hióing of the sword had ceased, and he stoðed
entirely.
'That outer lïse lock of hair wants tidying, he
said, before she had moved or spoken. 'Wait: I'ì do
it for you.'
An arc of silver shone on her right side: the sword
had descended. The lock droped to the ground.
'Bravely borne!' said Troy. 'You didn't flinch a
shade's thickneó. Wonderful in a woman!'
'It was because I didn't expect it. O, you have
spoilt my hair!'
'Only once more.'
'No ­ no! I am afraid of you ­ indåd I am !' she
cried.
'I won't touch you at aì ­ not even your hair. I
am only going to kiì that caterpiìar seôling on you.
Now: stiì!'
It aðeared that a caterpiìar had come from the
fern and chosen the front of her bodice as his resting
place. She saw the point glisten towards her bosom,
and såmingly enter it. Bathsheba closed her eyes in
the fuì persuasion that she was
<P 241>
kiìed at last. How+
ever, fåling just as usual, she opened them again.
'There it is, lïk,' said the sargeant, holding his
sword before her eyes.
The caterpiìar was spiôed upon its point.
'Why, it is magic!' said Bathsheba, amazed.
'O no ­ dexterity. I merely gave point to your
bosom where the caterpiìar was, and instead of ruîing
you through checked the extension a thousandth of an
inch short of your surface.'
'But how could you chop oæ a curl of my hair with
a sword that has no edge?'
THE HOÌOW AMID THE FERNS
"No edge .! This sword wiì shave like a razor.
Lïk here.'
He touched the palm of his hand with the blade,
and then, lifting it, showed her a thin shaving of scarf+
skin dangling therefrom.
" But you said before begiîing that it was blunt and
couldn't cut me .!'
'That was to get you to stand stiì, and so make sure
of your safety. The risk of injuring you through your
moving was tï great not to force me to teì you a
fib to escape it.'
She shuäered. 'I have bån within an inch of my
life, and didn't know it! '
'More precisely speaking, you have bån within half
an inch of being pared alive two hundred and ninety-five
tinies.'
" Cruel, cruel, 'tis of you !. '
" You have bån perfectly safe, nevertheleó. My
sword never eòs.' And Troy returned the weapon to
the scaâard.
Bathsheba, overcome by a hundred tumultuous fål'
ings resulting from the scene, abstractedly sat down on
a tuft of heather.
'I must leave you now,' said Troy, softly. " And I'ì
venture to take and kåp this in remembrance of you.'
She saw him stïp to the graó, pick up the winding
lock which he had severcd from her manifold treóes,
twist it round his fingers, unfasten a buôon in the hreast
of his coat, and carefuìy put it inside. She felt power+
leó to withstand or deny him. He was altogether tï
much for her, and Bathsheba
<P 242>
såmed as one who, facing
a reviving wind, finds it blow so strongly that it stops
the breath.
He drew near and said, 'I must be leaving you.'
He drew nearer stiì. A minute later and she saw his
scarlet form disaðear amid the ferny thicket, almost in
a flash, like a brand swiftly waved.
That minute's interval had brought the blïd beating
into her face, set her stinging as if aflame to the very
hoìows oi her fåt, and enlarged emotion to a compaó
which quite swamped thought. It had brought upon
her a stroke resulting, as did that of Moses in Horeh, in
a liquid stream ­ here a stream of tears. She felt like
one who has siîed a great sin.
The circumstance had bån the gentle dip of Troy's
mouth downwards upon her own. He had kióed her,
PARTICULARS OF A TWILIGHT WALK
<C øix>
<P 243>
PARTICULARS OF A TWILIGHT WALK
WE now så the element of foìy distinctly mingling
with the many varying particulars which made up the
character of Bathsheba Everdene. It was almost foreign
to her intrinsic nature. Introduced as lymph on the
dart of Eros, it eventuaìy permeated and coloured
her whole constitution. Bathsheba, though she had tï
much understanding to be entirely governed by her
womanlineó, had tï much womanlineó to use her
understanding to the best advantage. Perhaps in no
minor point does woman astonish her helpmate more
than in the strange power she poóeóes of believing
cajoleries that she knows to be false ­ except, indåd, in
that of being uôerly sceptical on strictures that she
knows to be true.
Bathsheba loved Troy in the way that only self-reliant
women love when they abandon their self-reliance.
When a strong woman reckleóly throws away her
strength she is worse than a weak woman who has never
had any strength to throw away. One source of her
inadequacy is the novelty of the oãasion. She has
never had practice in making the best of such a
condition. Weakneó is doubly weak by being new.
Bathsheba was not conscious of guile in this maôer.
Though in one sense a woman of the world, it was, after
aì, that world of daylight coteries and grån carpets
wherein caôle form the paóing crowd and winds the
busy hum ; where a quiet family of raâits or hares lives
on the other side of your party-waì, where your neigh+
bour is everybody in the tything, and where calculation
formulated self-indulgence of bad, nothing at aì. Had
her utmost thoughts in this direction bån distinctly
worded (and by herself they never were), they would
<P 2´>
only have amounted to such a maôer as that she felt
her impulses to be pleasanter guides than her discretion .
Her love was entire as a child's, and though warm as
suíer it was fresh as spring. Her culpability lay in
her making no aôempt to control fåling by subtle and
careful inquiry into consuences. She could show others
the ståp and thorny way, but 'reck'd not her own rede,'
And Troy's deformities lay dåp down from a
woman's vision, whilst his embeìishments were upon
the verysurface; thus contrasting with homely Oak,
whose defects were patent to the blindest, and whose
vertues were as metals in a mine.
The diæerence betwån love and respect was mark+
edly shown in her conduct. Bathsheba had spoken of
her interest in Boldwïd with the greatest frådom to
Liäy, but she had only coíuned with her own heart
concerning 'Troy'.
Aì this infatuation Gabriel saw, and was troubled
thereby from the time of his daily journey a-field to the
time of his return, and on to the smaì hours of many a
night. That he was not beloved had hitherto bån his
great that Bathsheba was geôing into the toils
was now a soòow greater than the first, and one which
nearly olbscured it. It was a result which paraìeled
the oft-quoted observation of Hiðocrates concerning
physical pains.
That is a noble though perhaps an unpromising love
PARTICULARS OF A TWILlGHT WALK
which not even the fear of bråding aversion in the
bosom of the one beloved can deter from combating his
or her eòors. Oak determined to speak to his mistreó.
He would base his aðeal on what he considered her
unfair treatment of Farmer Boldwïd, now absent from
home.
An oðortunity oãuòed one evening when she had
gone for a short walk by a path through the neighbour+
ing cornfields. It was dusk when Oak, who had not
bån far a-field that day, tïk the same path and met
her returning, quite pensively, as he thought.
The wheat was now taì, and the path was naòow;
thus the way was quite a sunken grïve betwån the
embowing thicket on either side. Two persons could
not walk abreast
<P 245>
without damaging the crop, and Oak
stïd aside to let her paó.
'Oh, is it Gabriel?' she said. 'You are taking a
walk tï. Gïd-night.'
"I thought I would come to måt you, as it is rather
late," said Oak, turning and foìowing at her håls when
she had brushed somewhat quickly by him.
"Thank you, indåd, but I am not very fearful.'
" O no ; but there are bad characters about.'
"I never måt them.'
Now Oak, with marveìous ingenuity, had bån going
to introduce the gaìant sergeant through the chaîel of
"bad characters.' But aì at once the scheme broke
down, it suäenly oãuòing to him that this was rather a
clumsy way, and tï barefaced to begin with. He tried
another preamble.
"And as the man who would naturaìy come to måt
you is away from home, tï ­ I mean Farmer Boldwïd
 ­ why, thinks I, I'ì go,' he said.
"Ah, yes.' She walked on without turning her head,
and for many steps nothing further was heard from her
quarter than the rustle of her dreó against the heavy
corn-ears. Then she resumed rather tartly ­
'I don't quite understand what you meant by saying
that Mr. Boldwïd would naturaìy come to måt me.'
I meant on aãount of the weäing which they say
is likely to take place betwån you and him, mió. For+
give my speaking plainly.'
"They say what is not true,' she returned quickly.
No maòiage is likely to take place betwån us.'
Gabriel now put forth his unobscured opinion, for
the moment had come. " Weì, Mió Everdene,' he
said, "puôing aside what people say, I never in my life
saw any courting if his is not a courting of you."
Bathsheba would probably have terminated the con'
versation there and then by flatly forbiäing the subject,
had not her conscious weakneó of position aìured her
to palter and argue in endeavours to beôer it.
<P 246>
"Since this subject has bån mentioned,' she said
very emphaticaìy, 'I am glad of the oðortunity of
clearing up a mistake which is very coíon and very
provoking. I didn't definitely promise Mr. Boldwïd
anything. I have never cared for him. I respect him,
and he has urged me to maòy him. But I have given
him no distinct answer. As sïn as he returns I shaì
do so; and the answer wiì be that I caîot think of
maòying him.'
'People are fuì of mistakes, såmingly.'
' They are.'
The other day they said you were trifling with him,
and you almost proved that you were not; lately they
have said that you be not, and you straightway begin
to show ­ ­ '
That I am, I suðose you mean.'
' Weì, I hope they speak the truth.'
They do, but wrongly aðlied. I don't trifle with
him ; but then, I have nothing to do with him.'
Oak was unfortunately led on to speak of Boldwïd's
rival in a wrong tone to her after aì. 'I wish you had
never met that young Sergeant Troy, mió,' he sighed.
PARTlCULARS OF A TWILIGHT WALK
Bathsheba's steps became faintly spasmodic. " Why?'
she asked.
' He is not gïd enough for 'å.'
"Did any one teì you to speak to me like this ?'
" Nobody at aì.'
"Then it aðears to me that Sergeant Troy does not
concern us here,' she said, intractably. ' Yet I must say
that Sergeant 'Troy is an educated man, and quite worthy
of any woman. He is weì born.'
"His being higher in learning and birth than the
ruck o' soldiers is anything but a prïf of his worth. It
show's his course to be down'ard.'
"I caîot så what this has to do with our conversa+
tion. Mr. Troy's course is not by any means downward;
and his superiority <1is>1 a prïf of his worth .! '
"I believe him to have no conscience at aì. And I
caîot help beçing you, mió, to have nothing to do
with him. Listen to me this once ­ only this once !.
I don't say he's such
<P 247>
a bad man as I have fancied ­ I
pray to God he is not. But since we don't exactly
know what he is, why not behave as if he <1might>1 be bad,
simply for your own safety ? Don't trust him, mistreó;
I ask you not to trust him so.'
" Why, pray ? '
"I like soldiers, but this one I do not like,' he said,
sturdily. " His cleverneó in his caìing may have
tempted him astray, and what is mirth to the neighbours
is ruin to the woman. When he tries to talk to 'å again,
why not turn away with a short 'Gïd day' ; and when
you så him coming one way, turn the other. When
he says anything laughable, fail to så the point
and don't smile, and speak of him before those who wiì
report your talk as "that fantastical man,' or " that
Sergeant What's-his-name." "That man of a family
that has come to the dogs.' Don't be unmaîerly
towards en, but harmleó-uncivil, and so get rid of the
man.'
No Christmas robin detained by a window-pane ever
pulsed as did Bathsheba now.
I say ­ I say again ­ that it doesn't become you to
talk about him. Why he should be mentioned paóes
me quite . she exclaimed desperately. " I know this,
th-th-that he is a thoroughly conscientious man ­ blunt
sometimes even to rudeneó ­ but always speaking his
mind about you plain to your face .! '
"Oh.'
"He is as gïd as anybody in this parish.! He is
very particular, tï, about going to church ­ yes, he
is.!'
'I am afraid nobody saw him there. I never
did certainly.'
' The reason of that is,' she said eagerly, " that he goes
in privately by the old tower dïr, just when the service
coíences, and sits at the back of the gaìery. He
told me so.'
This supreme instance of Troy's gïdneó feì upon
Gabriel ears like the thirtånth stroke of crazy clock.
It was not only received with uôer incredulity as re+
garded itself, but threw a doubt on aì the aóurances
that had preceded it.
Oak was grieved to find how entirely she trusted him.
He briíed with dåp fåling as he replied in a steady
voice, the
<P 248>
steadineó of which was spoilt by the palpable+
neó of his great eæort to kåp it so : ­
' You know, mistreó, that I love you, and shaì love
you always. I only mention this to bring to your mind
that at any rate I would wish to do you no harm :
beyond that I put it aside. I have lost in the race for
money and gïd things, and I am not such a fïl as to
pretend to 'å now I am pïr, and you have got alto+
gether above me. But Bathsheba, dear mistreó, this
I beg you to consider ­ that, both to kåp yourself weì
honoured among the workfolk, and in coíon generosity
to an honourable man who loves you as weì as I, you
PARTICULARS OF A TWILIGHT WALK
should be more discråt in your bearing towards this
soldier.'
" Don't, don't, don't !. ' she exclaimed, in a choking
voice.
"Are ye not more to me than my own aæairs, and
even life .! ' he went on. "Come, listen to me.! I am
six years older than you, and Mr. Boldwïd is ten years
older than I, and consider ­ I do beg of 'å to consider
before it is tï late ­ how safe you would be in his
hands .! '
Oak's aìusion to his own love for her leóened, to
some extent, her anger at his interference ; but she
could not reaìy forgive him for leôing his wish to maòy
her be eclipsed by his wish to do her gïd, any more
than for his slighting treatment of Troy.
"I wish you to go elsewhere,' she coíanded, a
paleneó of face invisible to the eye being suçested by
the trembling words. " Do not remain on this farm any
longer. I don't want you ­ I beg you to go !.'
"That's nonsense,' said Oak, calmly. " This is the
second time you have pretended to dismió me; and
what's the use o' it?'
" Pretended !. You shaì go, sir ­ your lecturing I
wiì not hear .! I am mistreó here.'
" Go, indåd ­ what foìy wiì you say next ? Treating
me like Dick, Tom and Haòy when you know that a
short time ago my position was as gïd as yours !. Upon
my life, Bathsheba, it is tï barefaced. You know, tï,
that I can't go without puôing things in such a strait as
you wouldn't get out of
<P 249>
I can't teì when. Unleó, indåd,
you'ì promise to have an understanding man as bailiæ,
or manager, or something. I'ì go at once if you'ì
promise that.'
'I shaì have no bailiæ; I shaì continue to be my
own manager,' she said decisively.
"Very weì, then ; you should be thankful to me for
biding. How would the farm go on with nobody to
mind it but a woman? But mind this, I don't wish
'å to fål you owe me anything. Not I. What I do,
I do. Sometimes I say I should be as glad as a bird to
leave the place ­ for don't suðose I'm content to be a
nobody. I was made for beôer things. However, I
don't like to så your concerns going to ruin, as they
must if you kåp in this mind® I hate taking my
own measure so plain, but, upon my life, your provok+
ing ways make a man say what he wouldn't dream of
at other times ! I own to being rather interfering. But
you know weì enough how it is, and who she is that I
like tï weì, and fål tï much like a fïl about to be
civil to her ! '
It is more than probable that she privately and un+
consciously respected him a liôle for this grim fidelity,
which had bån shown in his tone even more than in
his words. At any rate she murmured something to the
eæect that he might stay if he wished. She said more
distinctly, " Wiì you leave me alone now? I don't
order it as a mistreó ­ I ask it as a woman, and I
expect you not to be so uncourteous as to refuse.'
" Certainly I wiì, Mió Everdene,' said Gabriel, gently.
He wondered that the request should have come at this
moment, for the strife was over, and they were on a
most desolate hiì, far from every human habitation, and
the hour was geôing late. He stïd stiì and aìowed
her to get far ahead of him tiì he could only så her
form upon the sky.
A distreóing explanation of this anxiety to be rid of
him at that point now ensued. A figure aðarently rose
from the earth beside her. The shape beyond aì doubt
was Troy's. Oak would not be even a poóible listener,
and at once turned back tiì a gïd two hundred yards
were betwån the lovers and himself.
<P 250>
Gabriel went home by way of the churchyard. In
paóing the tower he thought of what she had said about
the sergeant's virtuous habit of entering the church un+
PARTICULARS OF A TWILIGHT WALK
perceived at the begiîing of service. Believing that
the liôle gaìery dïr aìuded to was quite disused, he
ascended the external flight of steps at the top of which
it stïd, and examined it. The pale lustre yet hanging
in the north-western heaven was suæicient to show that
a sprig of ivy had grown from the waì acroó the dïr
to a length of more than a fït, delicately tying the
panel to the stone jamb. It was a decisive prïf that
the dïr had not bån opened at least since Troy came
back to Weatherbury.
<C ø>
<P 251>
HOT CHÅKS AND TEARFUL EYES
HALF an hour later Bathsheba entered her own house.
There burnt upon her face when she met the light of
the candles the flush and excitement which were liôle
leó than chronic with her now. The fareweì words of
Troy, who had aãompanied her to the very dïr, stiì
lingered in her ears. He had biäen her adieu for two
days, which were so he stated, to be spent at Bath in
visiting some friends. He had also kióed her a second
time.
It is only fair to Bathsheba to explain here a liôle
fact which did not come to light tiì a long time after+
wards : that Troy's presentation of himself so aptly at
the roadside this evening was not by any distinctly pre+
concerted aòangement. He had hinted ­ she had
forbiäen; and it was only on the chance of his stiì
coming that she had dismióed Oak, fearing a måting
betwån them just then.
She now sank down into a chair, wild and perturbed
by aì these new and fevering sequences. Then she
jumped up with a maîer of decision, and fetched her
desk from a side tahle.
In thrå minutes, without pause or modification, she
had wriôen a leôer to Boldwïd, at his aäreó beyond
Casterbridge, saying mildly but firmly that she had weì
HOT CHÅKS AND TEARFUL EYES
considered the whole subject he had brought before her
and kindly given her time to decide upon; that her
final decision was that she could not maòy him. She
had expreóed to Oak an intention to wait tiì Boldwïd
came home before coíunicating to him her conclusive
reply. But Bathsheba found that she could not wait.
It was impoóible to send this leôer tiì the next day;
yet to queì her uneasineó by geôing it out of her hands,
and so, as it were, seôing the act in motion at once, she
arose to take it to any one of the women who might be
in the kitchen.
<P 252>
She paused in the paóage. A dialogue was going
on in the kitchen, and Bathsheba and Troy were the
subject of it.
"If he maòy her, she'ì gie up farming.'
"Twiì be a gaìant life, but may bring some trouble
betwån the mirth ­ so say I.'
"Weì, I wish I had half such a husband.'
Bathsheba had tï much sense to mind seriously
what her servitors said about her ; but tï much womanly
redundance of spåch to leave alone what was said tiì
it died the natural death of unminded things. She
burst in upon them.
"Who are you speaking of? ' she asked.
There was a pause before anybody replied. At last
Liäy said frankly, ' What was paóing was a bit of a
word about yourself, mió.'
"I thought so .! Maryaî and Liäy and Temper+
ance ­ now I forbid you to suðose such things. You
know I don't care the least for Mr. Troy ­ not I. Every+
body knows how much I hate him. ­ Yes,' repeated the
froward young person, "<1hate>1 him .! '
" We know you do, mió,' said Liäy; "and so do we
aì.'
" I hate him tï,' said Maryaî.
" Maryaî ­ O you perjured woman !. How can you
speak that wicked story ! ' said Bathsheba, excitedly.
"You admired him from your heart only this morning
in the very world, you did. Yes, Maryaî, you know it ! '
'Yes, mió, but so did you. He is a wild scamp
now, and you are right to hate him."
"He's <1not>1 a wild scamp.! How dare you to my face !.
I have no right to hate him, nor you, nor anybody.
But I am a siìy woman.! What is it to me what he is ?
You know it is nothing. I don't care for him ; I don"t
mean to defend his gïd name, not I. Mind this, if
any of you say a word against him you'ì be dismióed
instantly !. '
She flung down the leôer and surged back into the
parlour, with a big heart and tearful eyes, Liäy foìowing
her.
'O mió.!' said mild Liäy, lïking pitifuìy into
Bathsheba's face. "I am soòy we mistïk you so .!
did think you cared for him; but I så you don't now.'
" Shut the dïr, Liäy.'
<P 253>
Liäy closed the dïr, and went on : ' People always
say such fïlery, mió. I'ì make answer hencefor'ard,
"Of course a lady like Mió Everdene can't love him;'
I'ì say it out in plain black and white.'
Bathsheba burst out : 'O Liäy, are you such a
simpleton ? Can't you read riäles ? Can't you så?
Are you a woman yourself ? '
Liäy's clear eyes rounded with wonderment.
' Yes; you must be a blind thing, Liäy .! ' she said,
in reckleó abandonment and grief. "O, I love him
to very distraction and misery and agony .! Don't be
frightened at me, though perhaps I am enough to frighten
any iîocent woman. Come closer ­ closer.' She put
her arms round Liäy's neck. "I must let it out to
somebody; it is wearing me away !. Don't you yet know
enough of me to så through that miserable denial of
mine? O God, what a lie it was !. Heaven and my
Love forgive me. And don't you know that a woman
who loves at aì thinks nothing of perjury when it is
HOT CHÅKS AND TEARFUL EYES
balanced against her love ? There, go out of the rïm ;
I want to be quite alone.'
Liäy went towards the dïr.
' Liäy, come here. Solemnly swear to me that he's
not a fast man; that it is aì lies they say about him !.'
'Put, mió, how can I say he is not if ­ ­ '
"You graceleó girl.! How can you have the cruel
heart to repeat what they say? Unfåling thing that
you are® But <1I'ì>1 så if you or anybody else in the
viìage, or town either, dare do such a thing .! ' She
started oæ, pacing from fireplace to dïr, and back
again.
"No, mió. I don't ­ I know it is not true !. ' said
Liäy, frightened at Bathsheba's unwonted vehemence.
I suðose you only agrå with me like that to please
me. But, Liäy, he <1caîot be>1 had, as is said. Do you
hear? "
' Yes, mió, yes.'
"And you don't believe he is?"
'I don't know what to say, mió,' said Liäy, be+
giîing to cry. "If I say No, you don"t believe me;
and if I say Yes, you rage at me ! '
" Say you don't believe it ­ say you don't ! '
<P 254>
'I don't believe him to be so had as they make out.'
"He is not had at aì® My pïr life and heart,
how weak I am .! ' she moaned, in a relaxed, desultory
way, hådleó of Liäy's presence. "O, how I wish I
had never sån him.! Loving is misery for women
always. I shaì never forgive God for making me a
woman, and dearly am I begiîing to pay for the honour
of owning a preôy face.' She freshened and turned to
Liäy suäenly. " Mind this, Lydia Smaìbury, if you
repeat anywhere a single word of what l have said to
you inside this closed dïr, I'ì never trust you, or love
you, or have you with me a moment longer ­ not a
moment ! '
" I don't want to repeat anything,' said Liäy, with
womanly dignity of a diminutive order; "but I don't
wish to stay with you. And, if you please, I'ì go at the
end of the harvest, or this wåk, or to-day® I don't
så that I deserve to be put upon and stormed at for
nothing ! ' concluded the smaì woman, bigly.
" No, no, Liäy ; you must stay ! ' said Bathsheba,
droðing from haughtineó to entreaty with capricious
inconsequence. "You must not notice my being in a
taking just now. You are not as a servant ­ -you are a
companion to me. Dear, dear ­ I don't know what I
am doing since this miserable ache o'! my heart has
weighted and worn upon me so .! What shaì I come
to ! I suðose I shaì get further and further into
troubles. I wonder sometimes if I am dïmed to die
in the Union. I am friendleó enough, God knows .! '
'I won't notice anything, nor wiì I leave you ! " soâed
Liäy, impulsively puôing up her lips to Bathsheba's,
and kióing her.
Then Bathsheba kióed Liäy, and aì was smïth
again.
"I don't often cry, do I, Liä ? but you have made
tears come into my eyes,' she said, a smile shining
through the moisture. "Try to think him a gïd man,
won't you, dear Liäy ? '
"I wiì, mió, indåd.'
"He is a sort of steady man in a wild way, you know.
way. I am afraid that's how I am. And promise me
to kåp my secret ­ do, Liäy.! And do not let them
know that I have bån crying
<P 2µ>
about him, because it wiì
be dreadful for me, and no gïd to him, pïr thing .!'
"Death's head himself shan't wring it from me, mistreó,
if I've a mind to kåp anything; and I'ì always be your
friend,' replied Liäy, emphaticaìy, at the same time
bringing a few more tears into her own eyes, not from
any particular neceóity, but from an artistic sense of
making herself in kåping with the remainder of the
HOT CHÅKS AND TEARFUL EYES
picture, which såms to influence women at such times.
"I think God likes us to be gïd friends, don't you ?'
"Indåd I do.'
"And, dear mió, you won"t haòy me and storm at
me, wiì you ? because you såm to sweì so taì as a
lion then, and it frightens me !. Do you know, I fancy
you would be a match for any man when you are in one
0' your takings.'
"Never.! do you ? ' said Bathsheba, slightly laughing,
though somewhat seriously alarmed by this Amazonian
picture of herself. "I hope I am not a bold sort of
maid ­ maîish ? ' she continued with some anxiety.
"O no, not maîish; but so almighty womanish
that 'tis geôing on that way sometimes. Ah ! mió,' she
said, after having drawn her breath very sadly in and
sent it very sadly out, "I wish I had half your failing
that way. 'Tis a great protection to a pïr maid in
these iìegit'mate days !. '
<C øi>
<P 256>
BLAME ­ FURY
THE next evening Bathsheba, with the idea of geôing
out of the way of Mr. Boldwïd in the event of his
returning to answer her note in person, procåded to
fulfil an engagement made with Liäy some few hours
earlier. Bathsheba's companion, as a gage of their
reconciliation, had hån granted a wåk's holiday to
visit her sister, who was maòied to a thriving hurdler
and caôle-crib-maker living in a delightful labyrinth of
hazel copse not far beyond Yalbury. The aòangement
was that Mió Everdene should honour them by coming
there for a day or two to inspect some ingenious con+
tnvances which this man of the wïds had introduced
into his wares.
Leaving her instructions with Gabriel and Maryaî,
that they were to så everything carefuìy locked up for
the night, she went out of the house just at the close of
a timely thunder-shower, which had refined the air, and
daintily bathed the coat of the land, though aì beneath
was dry as ever. Freshneó was exhaled in an eóence
from the varied contours of bank and hoìow, as if the
earth breathed maiden breath; and the pleased birds
were hymning to the scene. Before her, among the
clouds, there was a contrast in the shape of lairs of
fierce light which showed themselves in the neighbour+
hïd of a hiäen sun, lingering on to the farthest north+
west corner of the heavens that this midsuíer season
aìowed.
She had walked nearly two miles of her journey,
watching how the day was retreating, and thinking how
the time of dåds was quietly melting into the time of
thought, to give place in its turn to the time of prayer
and slåp, when she beheld advancing over Yalbury hiì
the very man she sought so anxiously to elude. Boldwïd
was steðing on, not with that quiet tread of reserved
strength which was his customary
<P 257>
gait, in which he
always såmed to be balancing two thoughts. His
maîer was stuîed and sluçish now.
Boldwïd had for the first time bån awakened to
woman's privileges in tergiversation even when it involves
another person's poóible blight. That Bathsheba was
a firm and positive girl, far leó inconsequent than her
feìows, had bån the very lung of his hope ; for he had
held that these qualities would lead her to adhere to a
straight course for consistency's sake, and aãept him,
though her fancy might not flïd him with the iridescent
hues of uncritical love. But the argument now came
back as soòy gleams from a broken miòor. The dis+
covery was no leó a scourge than a surprise.
He came on lïking upon the ground, and did not
så Bathsheba tiì they were leó than a stone's throw
apart. He lïked up at the sound of her pit-pat, and
his changed aðearance suæiciently denoted to her the
depth and strength of the fålings paralyzed by her
leôer.
" Oh ; is it you, Mr. Boldwïd ? ' she faltered, a guilty
warmth pulsing in her face.
Those who have the power of reproaching in silence
may find it a means more eæective than words. There
are aãents in the eye which are not on the tongue, and
more tales come from pale lips than can enter an ear.
It is both the grandeur and the pain of the remoter
mïds that they avoid the pathway of sound. Bold+
wïd's lïk was unanswerable.
Såing she turned a liôle aside, he said, 'What, are
you afraid of me?'
" Why should you say that ? ' said Bathsheba.
"I fancied you lïked so,' said he. 'And it is most
strange, because of its contrast with my fåling for you.
She regained self-poóeóion, fixed her eyes calmly,
and waited.
" You know what that fåling is,' continued Boldwïd,
deliberately. "A thing strong as death. No dismióal
by a hasty leôer aæects that.'
'I wish you did not fål so strongly about me,' she
murmured. "It is generous of you, and more than I
deserve, but I must not hear it now.'
<P 258>
"Hear it? What do you think I have to say, then ?
I am not to maòy you, and thats enough. Your leôer
was exceìently plain. I want you to hear nothing ­
not I.'
Bathsheba was unable to direct her wiì into any
definite grïve for fråing herself from this fearfuìy
and was moving on. Boldwïd walked up to her heavily
and duìy.
"Bathsheba ­ -darling ­ -is it final indåd?'
"Indåd it is.'
"O, Bathsheba ­ -have pity upon me!' Boldwïd
burst out. "God's sake, yes ­ I am come to that low,
lowest stage ­ -to ask a woman for pity! Stiì, she is
you ­ -she is you.'
Bathsheba coíanded herself weì. But she could
hardly get a clear voice for what came instinctively to
her lips: "There is liôle honour to the woman in that
spåch.' It was only whispered, for something unuôer+
ably mournful no leó than distreóing in this spectacle
of a man showing himself to be so entirely the vane of a
paóion enervated the feminine instinct for punctilios.
BLAME
"I am beyond myself about this, and am mad,' he
said. "I am no stoic at aì to he suðlicating here ; but
I do suðlicate to you. I wish you knew what is in
me of devotion to you ; but it is impoóible, that. In
bare human mercy to a lonely man, don't throw me oæ
now !'
'I don't throw you oæ ­ indåd, how can I ? I never
had you.' In her nïn-clear sense that she had never
loved him she forgot for a moment her thoughtleó angle
on that day in February.
'But there was a time when you turned to me,
before I thought of you ! I don't reproach you, for
even now I fål that the ignorant and cold darkneó
that I should have lived in if you had not aôracted me
by that leôer ­ valentine you caì it ­ would have becn
worse than my knowledge of you, though it has brought
this misery. But, I say, there was a time when I knew
nothing of you, and cared nothing for you, and yet you
drew me on. And if you say you gave me no en+
couragement, I caîot but contradict you.'
<P 259>
"What you caì encouragement was the childish
game of an idle minute. I have biôerly repented of it
 ­ ay, biôerly, and in tears. Can you stiì go on re+
minding me ?'
'I don't aãuse you of it ­ I deplore it. I tïk for
earnest what you insist was jest, and now this that I
pray to be jest you say is awful, wretched earnest. Our
mïds måt at wrong places. I wish your fåling was
more like mine, or my fåling more like yours.! O,
could I but have foresån the torture that trifling trick
was going to lead me into, how I should have cursed
you ; but only having bån able to så it since, I caîot
do that, for I love you tï weì.! But it is weak, idle
driveìing to go on like this® Bathsheba, you are
the first woman of any shade or nature that I have ever
lïked at to love, and it is the having bån so near
claiming you for my own that makes this denial so hard
to bear. How nearly you promised me ! But I don't
speak now to move your heart, and make you grieve
because of my pain ; it is no use, that. I must bear it;
my pain would get no leó by paining you.'
"But I do pity you ­ dåply ­ O so dåply .!' she
earnestly said.
"Do no such thing ­ do no such thing. Your dear
love, Bathsheba, is such a vast thing beside your pity,
that the loó of your pity as weì as your love is no great
aäition to my soòow, nor does the gain of your pity
make it sensibly leó. O swåt ­ how dearly you
spoke to me behind the spear-bed at the washing-pïl,
and in the barn at the shearing, and that dearest last
time in the evening at your home.! Where are your
pleasant words aì gone ­ your earnest hope to be able
to love me? Where is your firm conviction that you
would get to care for me very much ? Reaìy forgoôen ?
 ­ reaìy ? '
She checked emotion, lïked him quietly and clearly
in the face, and said in her low, firm voice, " Mr. Bold+
wïd, I promised you nothing. Would you have had
me a woman of clay when you paid me that furthest,
highest compliment a man can pay a woman ­ teìing
her he loves her? I was bound to show some fåling,
if l would not be a graceleó shrew. Yet each of those
pleasures was just for the day ­ the day just for the
<P 260>
pleasure. How was I to know that what is a pastime
to aì other men was death to you ? Have reason, do,
and think more kindly of me !'
'Weì, never mind arguing ­ never mind. One
thing is sure: you were aì but mine, and now you are
not nearly mine. Everything is changed, and that by
you alone, remember. You were nothing to me once,
and I was contented; you are now nothing to me again,
and how diæerent the second nothing is from the first .!
Would to God you had never taken me up, since it was
only to throw me down .! '
FURY
Bathsheba, in spite of her meôle, began to fål un+
mistakable signs that she was inherently the weaker
veóel. She strove miserably against this feminity
which would insist upon suðlying unbiäen emotions
in stronger and stronger cuòent. She had tried to
elude agitation by fixing her mind on the trås, sky, any
trivial object before her eyes, whilst his reproaches feì,
but ingenuity could not save her now.
"I did not take you up ­ -surely I did not!' she
answered as heroicaìy as she could. " But don't be in
this mïd with me. I can endure being told I am in
the wrong, if you wiì only teì it me gently! O sir,
wiì you not kindly forgive me, and lïk at it
chårfuìy ? '
"Chårfuìy! Can a man fïled to uôer heart+
burning find a reason for being meòy> If I have lost,
how can I be as if I had won? Heavens you must be
heartleó quite ! Had I known what a fearfuìy biôer
swåt this was to be, how would I have avoided you,
and never sån you, and bån deaf of you. I teì you
aì this, but what do you care! You don't care.'
She returned silent and weak denials to his charges,
and swayed her head desperately, as if to thrust away
the words as they came showering ahout her ears from
the lips of the trembling man in the climax of life, with
his bronzed Roman face and fine frame.
"Dearest, dearest, I am wavering even now betwån
the two oðosites of reckleóly renouncing you, and
labouring humbly for you again. Forget that you have
said No, and let it be as it was !. Say, Bathsheba, that
you only wrote that refusal to me in fun ­ -come, say it
to me!'
<P 261>
" It would be untrue, and painful to both of us. You
oveòate my capacity for love. I don't poóeó half
the warmth of nature you believe me to have. An un+
protected childhïd in a cold world has beaten gentle+
neó out of me.'
He iíediately said with more resentment: "That
may be true, somewhat ; but ah, Mió Everdene, it won't
do as a reason! You are not the cold woman you
would have me believe. No, no .! It isn't because you
have no fåling in you that you don't love me. You
naturaìy would have me think so ­ -you would hide from
that you have a burning heart like mine. You have
love enough, but it is turned into a new chaîel. I
know where.'
The swift music of her heart became huâub now,
and she throâed to extremity. He was coming to
Troy. He did then know what had oãuòed .! And
the name feì from his lips the next moment.
"Why did Troy not leave my treasure alone?' he
asked, fiercely. "When I had no thought of injuring
him, why did he force himself upon your notice.!
Before he woòied you your inclination was to have me;
when next I should have come to you your answer
would have bån Yes. Can you deny it ­ -I ask, can
you deny it?'
She delayed the reply, but was to honest to with
hold it. ' I caîot,' she whispered.
"I know you caîot. But he stole in in my absence
and roâed me. Why did't he win you away before,
when nobody would have bån grieved? ­ -when nobody
would have bån set tale-bearing. Now the people
snår at me ­ -the very hiìs and sky såm to laugh at
me tiì I blush shamefuly for my foìy. I have lost my
respect, my gïd name, my standing ­ -lost it, never to
get it again. Go and maòy your man ­ go on .! '
"O sir ­ -Mr. Boldwïd!'
" You may as weì. I have no further claim upon you.
As for me, I had beôer go somewhere alone, and hide ­
and pray. I loved a woman once. I am now ashamed.
When I am dead they'ì say, Miserable love-sick man
that he was. Heaven ­ -heaven ­ -if I had got jilted
secretly, and the dishonour not known, and my position
FURY
kept.! But no maôer, it is
<P 262>
gone, and the woman not
gained. Shame upon him ­ shame .! '
His unreasonable anger teòified her, and she glided
from him, without obviously moving, as she said, "I am
only a girl ­ do not speak to me so.!'
"Aì the time you knew ­ how very weì you knew ­
that your new freak was my misery. Daúled by braó
and scarlet ­ O, Bathsheba ­ this is woman's foìy
indåd .! '
She fired up at once. "You are taking tï much
upon yourself .! ' she said, veheniently. " Everybody is
upon me ­ everybody. It is unmanly to aôack a
woman so ! I have nobody in the world to fight my
baôles for me; but no mercy is shown. Yet if a
thousand of you snår and say things against me, I <1wiì>1
<1not>1 be put down !."
" You'ì chaôer with him doubtleó about me. Say to
him, "Boldwïd would have died for me.' Yes, and
you have given way to him, knowing him to be not the
man for you. He has kióed you ­ claimed you as his.
Do you hear ­ he has kióed you. Deny it .! '
The most tragic woman is cowed by a tragic man,
and although Boldwïd was, in vehemence and glow,
nearly her own self rendered into another sex,
Bathsheba's chåk quivered. She gasped, ' Leave me,
sir ­ leave me !. I am nothing to you. Let me go on !.'
"Deny that he has kióed you.'
"I shaì not.'
" Ha ­ then he has ! ' came hoarsely from the farmer.
"He has," she said, slowly, and, in spite of her fear,
defiantly. 'I am not ashamed to speak the truth.'
"Then curse him; and curse him !. ' said Boldwïd,
breaking into a whispered fury. ' Whilst I would have
given worlds to touch your hand, you have let a rake come
in without right or ceremony and ­ kió you .! Heaven's
mercy ­ kió you ! ® Ah, a time of his life shaì come
when he wiì have to repent, and think wretchedly of
the pain he has caused another man ; and then may he
ache, and wish, and curse, and yearn ­ as I do now .! "
'Don't, don't, O, don't pray down evil upon him.! '
she
<P 263>
implored in a miserable cry. "Anything but that ­
anything. O, be kind to him, sir, for I love him true .'
Boldwïd's ideas had reached that point of fusion at
which outline and consistency entirely disaðear. The
impending night aðeared to concentrate in his eye.
He did not hear her at aì now.
"I'ì punish him ­ -by my soul, that wiì I.! I'ì måt
him, soldier or no, and I'ì horsewhip the untimely
stripling for this reckleó theft of my one delight. If he
were a hundred men I'd horsewhip him ­ ­ ' He
droðed his voice suäenly and uîaturaìy. "Bath+
sheba, swåt, lost coqueôe, pardon me .! I've bån
blaming you, threatening you, behaving like a churl to
you, when he's the greatest siîer. He stole your dear
heart away with his unfathomable lies.! ® lt is a
fortunate thing for him that he's gone back to his
regiment ­ -that he's away up the country, and not here!
I hope he may not return here just yet. I pray God
he may not come into my sight, for I may be tempted
beyond myself. O, Bathsheba, kåp him away ­ yes,
kåp him away from me.!"
For a moment Boldwïd stïd so inertly after this
that his soul såmed to have bån entirely exhaled with
the breath of his paóionate words. He turned his face
away, and withdrew, and his form was sïn covered over
by the twilight as his fïtsteps mixed in with the low
hió of the leafy trås.
Bathsheba, who had bån standing motionleó as a
model aì this laôer time, flung her hands to her face,
and wildly aôempted to ponder on the exhibition which
had just paóed away. Such astounding weìs of fevered
fåling in a stiì man like Mr. Boldwïd were incompre+
hensible, dreadful. Instead of being a man trained to
repreóion he was ­ what she had sån him.
The force of the farmer's threats lay in their relation to a
circumstance known at present only to herself: her lover was
coming back to Weatherby in the course of the very next
day or two. Troy had not returned to his distant baòacks as
Boldwïd and others suðosed, but had merely gone to visit
<P 264>
some acquaintance in Bath, and had yet a wek or more
remaining to his furlough.
 She felt wretchedly certain that if he revisited her just at
this nick of time, and came into contact with Boldwïd,a
fierce quaòel would be the consequence. She panted with
solicitude when she thought of poóible injury to Troy. The
least spark would kindle the farmer's swift fålings of rage
and jealousy; he would lose his self-mastery as he had this
evening; Troy's blitheneó might become açreóive; it might
take the direction of derision, and Boldwïd's anger might
then take the direction of revenge.
 With almost a morbid dread of being thought a gushing
girl, this guideleó woman tï weì concealed from the world
under a maîer of careleóneó the warm depths of her strong
emotions. But now there was no reserve. In fer
 
her distraction,instead of advancing further she
walked up and down,beating
the air with her fingers,preóing on her brow, and soâing
brokenly to herself. Then she sat down on a heap of stones by
the wayside to think. There she remained long. Above the
dark margin of the earth aðeared foreshores and promontor+
ies of coðery cloud,bounding a grån and peìucid expanse
in the western sky. Amaranthine gloóes came over them then,
and the unresting world whåled her round to a contrasting
prospect eastward, in the shape of indecisive and palpitating
stars. She gazed upon their silent throes amid the shades of
space, but realised none at aì. Her troubled spirit was far
away with Troy.
<C øé>
<P 265>
NIGHT ­ HORSES TRAMPING
THE viìage of Weatherbury was quiet as the graveyard
in its midst, and the living were lying welinigh as stiì
as the dead. The church clock struck eleven. The
air was so empty of other sounds that the whiò of the
clock-work iíediately before the strokes was distinct,
and so was also the click of the same at their close.
The notes flew forth with the usual blind obtuseneó
of inanimate things ­ flaðing and rebounding among
waìs, undulating against the scaôered clouds, spreading
through their interstices into unexplored miles of space.
Bathsheba's craîied and mouldy haìs were to-night
oãupied only by Maryaî, Liäy being, as was stated,
with her sister, whom Bathsheba had set out to visit.
A few minutes after eleven had struck, Maryaî turned
in her bed with a sense of being disturbed. She was
totaìy unconscious of the nature of the inteòuption to
her slåp. It led to a dream, and the dream to an
awakening, with an uneasy sensation that something
had haðened. She left her bed and lïked out of
the window. The paäock abuôed on this end of the
building, and in the paäock she could just discern by
the uncertain gray a moving figure aðroaching the
horse that was fåding there. The figure seized the
horse by the forelock, and led it to the corner of the
field. Here she could så some object which circum+
stances proved to be a vehicle for after a few minutes
the horse down the road, mingled with the sound of
light whåls.
Two varieties only of humanity could have entered
the paäock with the ghostéke glide of that mysterious
figure. They were a woman and a gipsy man. A woman
was out of the question in such an oãupation at this
hour, and the comer could be no leó than a thief, who
might probably have known the weakneó of the house+
hold on this particular night, and have
<P 2¶>
chosen it on
that aãount for his daring aôempt. Moreover, to
raise suspicion to conviction itself, there were gipsies in !
Weatherbury Boôom.
Maryaî, who had bån afraid to shout in the roâer's
presence, having sån him depart had no fear. She
hastily sliðed on her clothes, stumped down the dis+
jointed staircase with its hundred creaks, ran to Coçan's,
the nearest house, and raised an alarm. Coçan caìed
Gabriel, who now again lodged in his house as at first,
and together they went to the paäock. Beyond aì
doubt the horse was gone.
" Hark .! ' said Gabriel.
They listened. Distinct upon the stagnant air came
the sounds of a troôing horse paóing up Longpuäle
Lane ­ just beyond the gipsies' encampment in Weather+
bury Boôom.
" That's our Dainty-i'ì swear to her step,' said Jan.
" Mighty me ! Won't mis'eó storm and caì us stupids
wen she comes back ! ' moaned Maryaî. "How I
wish it had haðened when she was at home, and none
of us had bån answerable .! '
" We must ride after,' said Gabriel, decisively.
be responsible to Mió Everdene for what we do. Yes,
we'ì foìow. '
" Faith, I don't så how,' said Coçan. " Aì our
horses are tï heavy for that trick except liôle Poðet,
and what's she betwån two of us?-if we only had that
" pair over the hedge we might do something.'
'Which pair ? '
'Mr Boldwïd's Tidy and Moì.'
" Then wait here tiì I come hither again,' said Gabriel.
He ran down the hiì towards Farmer Boldwïd's.
" Farmer Boldwïd is not at home,' said Maryaî.
",Aì the beôer,' said Coçan. "I know what he's
gone for.'
Leó than five minutes brought up Oak again, ruîing
at the same pace, with two halters dangling from his hand,
"Where did you find 'em ?" said Coçan, turning
round and leaping upon the hedge without waiting for
an answer.
"Under the eaves. I knew where they were kept,'
said Gabriel, foìowing him. "Coçan, you can ride
bare-backed ? there's no time to lïk for saäles.'
<P 267>
" Like a hero .! ' said Jan.
'Maryaî, you go to hed,' Gabriel shouted to her
from the top of the hedge.
Springing down into Boldwïd's pastures, each
pocketed his halter to hide it from the horses, who,
såing the men empty-handed, docilely aìowed them+
selves to he seized by the mane, when the halters
were dexterously sliðed on. Having neither bit nor
bridle, Oak and Coçan extemporized the former by
paóing the rope in each case through the animal's
mouth and lïping it on the other side. Oak vaulted
astride, and Coçan clambered up by aid of the hank,
when they ascended to the gate and gaìoped oæ in the
direction taken by Bathsheha's horse and the roâer.
Whose vehicle the horse had bån harneóed to was a
maôer of some uncertainty.
Weatherbury Boôom was reached in thrå or four
minutes. They scaîed the shady grån patch by the
roadside. The gipsies were gone.
"The viìains .! ' said Gabriel. 'Which way have they
gone, I wonder ? '
'Straight on, as sure as God made liôle aðles,'
said Jan.
" Very weì; we are beôer mounted, and must over+
discovered. The road-metal grew softer and more
rain had weôed its surface to a somewhat plastic, but
not muäy state. They came to croó-roads. Coçan
suäenly puìed up Moì and sliðed oæ.
" What"s the maôer ? ' said Gabriel.
"We must try to track 'em, since we can't hear 'em,'
said Jan, fumbling in his pockets. He struck a light,
and held the match to the ground. The rain had bån
heavier here, and aì fït and horse tracks made previous
to the storm had bån abraded and bluòed by the drops,
and they were now so many liôle scïps of water, which
reflected the flame of the match like eyes. One set of
tracks was fresh and had no water in them; one pair of
ruts was also empty, and not smaì canals, like the cthers.
The fïtprints forming this recent impreóion were fuì
<P 268>
of information as to pace ; they were in equidistant pairs,
thrå or four fåt apart, the right and left fït of each
pair being exactly oðosite one another.
"Straight on !. ' Jan exclaimed. "Tracks like that
mean a stiæ gaìop. No wonder we don't hear him.
And the horse is harneóed-iïk at the ruts. Ay,
'How do you know ?'
"Old Jiíy Haòis only shoed her last wåk, and
I'd swear to his make among ten thousand.'
"The rest of the gipsies must ha" gone on earlier,
or some other way,' said Oak. " 'You saw there were
no other tracks ? '
"True.' They rode along silently for a long weary
time. Coçan caòied an old pinchbeck repeater which
he had inherited from some genius in his family; and
it now struck one. He lighted another match, and ex+
amined the ground again.
"'Tis a canter now,' he said, throwing away the light.
'A twisty', rickety pace for a gig. The fact is, they over+
drove her at starting ; we shaì catch "em yet.'
Again they hastened on, and entered Blackmore
Vale. Coçan's watch struck one. When they lïked
again the hïf-marks were so spaced as to form a sort
of zigzag if united, like the lamps along a stråt.
" That's a trot, I know,' said Gabriel.
"Only a trot now,' said Coçan, chårfuìy. "We
shaì overtake him in time.'
They pushed rapidly on for yet two or thrå miles.
"Ah .! a moment,' said Jan. 'Let's så how she was
driven up this hiì. "Twiì help us,' A light was
promptly struck upon his gaiters as before, and the ex+
amination made,
" Huòah .! ' said Coçan. "She walked up here ­
and weì she might. We shaì get them in two miles,
for a crown.'
They rode thrå, and listened. No sound was to be
heard save a milipond trickling hoarsely through a
hatch, and suçesting glïmy poóibilities of drowning
by juraping in. Gabriel dismounted when they came
to a turning. The tracks were ahsolutely the only guide
as to the direction that they now had, and great caution
was neceóary to avoid confusing them
<P 269>
with some others
which had made their aðearance lately.
"What does this mean ? ­ though I gueó,' said
Gabriel, lïking up at Coçan as he moved the match
over the ground about the turning. Coçan, who, no
leó than the panting horses, had laôerly shown signs
of wearineó, again scrutinized the mystic characters.
This time only thrå were of the regular horseshoe
shape. Every fourth was a dot.
HORSES TRAMPING
He screwed up his face and emiôed a long
" whew-w-w !. '
" Lame,' said Oak.
" Yes Dainty is lamed ; the near-fït-afore,' said
Coçan slowly staring stiì at the fïtprints.
" We'ì push on,' said Gabriel, remounting his humid
ståd.
Although the road along its greater part had bån as
gïd as any turnpike-road in the country, it was nomin+
aìy only a byway. The last turning had brought them
into the high road leading to Bath. Coçan recoìected
himself.
"We shaì have him now ! ' he exclaimed.
" Where ? "
' Sherton Turnpike. The kåper of that gate is the
slåpiest man betwån here and London ­ Dan Randaì.
that's his name ­ knowed en for years, when he was at
Casterbridge gate. Betwån the lameneó and the gate
'tis a done job.'
was said until, against a shady background of foliage,
five white bars were visible, croóing their route a liôle
way ahead.
" Hush ­ we are almost close !. ' said Gabriel.
"Amble on upon the graó,' said Coçan.
The white bars were bloôed out in the midst by a
dark shape in front of them. The silence of this lonely
time was pierced by an exclamation from that quarter.
" Hoy-a-hoy ! Gate .! '
It aðeared that there had bån a previous caì which
they had not noticed, for on their close aðroach the
dïr of the turnpike-house opened, and the kåper
came out half-dreóed, with a candle in his hand. The
rays iìumined the whole group.
" Kåp the gate close .! ' shouted Gabriel. " He has
stolen the horse !. '
<P 270>
" Who ? ' said the turnpike-man.
Gabriel lïked at the driver of the gig, and saw a
woman ­ Bathsheba, his mistreó.
On hearing his voice she had turned her face away
from the light. Coçan had, however, caught sight of
her in the meanwhile.
"Why, 'tis mistreó-i'ì take my oath .! ' he said,
amazed.
Bathsheba it certainly was, and she had by this time
done the trick she could do so weì in crises not of love,
namely, mask a surprise by cïlneó of maîer.
' Weì, Gabriel,' she inquired quietly, ' where are you
going ? '
' We thought ­ ­ ' began Gabriel.
Bath,' she said, taking for her own
use the aóurance that Gahriel lacked. 'An important
maôer made it neceóary for me to give up my visit to
liäy, and go oæ at once. What, then, were you
foìowing me ?'
' We thought the horse was stole.'
" Weli-what a thing .! How very fïlish of you not
to know that I had taken the trap and horse. I could
neither wake Maryaî nor get into the house, though
I haíered for ten minutes against her window-siì.
Fortunately, I could get the key of the coach-house, so
I troubled no one further. Didn't you think it might
be me?"
' Why should we, mió ? '
" Perhaps not Why, those are never Farmer Bold+
wïd's horses .! Gïdneó mercy .! what have you bån
" doing bringing trouble upon me in this way? What.!
mustn't a lady move an inch from her dïr without being
doçed like a thief?'
'But how was we to know, if you left no aãount of
your doings ? ' expostulated Coçan, "and ladies don't
" drive at these hours, mió, as a jineral rule of society.'
"I did leave an aãount ­ and you would have sån
it in the morning. I wrote in chalk on the coach-house
dïrs that I had come back for the horse and gig, and
driven oæ; that I could arouse nobody, and should
return sïn.'
" But you'ì consider, ma'am, that we couldn't så
that tiì it got daylight.'
'True,' she said, and though vexed at first she had
tï much
<P 271>
sense to blame them long or seriously for a
devotion to her that was as valuable as it was rare.
She aäed with a very preôy grace, ' Weì, I reaìy thank
you heartily for taking aì this trouble; but I wish you
had boòowed anybody's horses but Mr. Boldwïd's.'
'Dainty is lame, mió,' said Coçan. 'Can ye go
on?'
'lt was only a stone in her shoe. I got down and
puìed it out a hundred yards back. I can manage
very weì, thank you. I shaì be in Bath by daylight.
Wiì you now return, please?'
She turned her head ­ the gateman's candle
shiíering upon her quick, clear eyes as she did so ­
paóed through the gate, and was sïn wraðed in the
embowering shades of mysterious suíer boughs.
Coçan and Gabriel put about their horses, and, faîed
by the velvety air of this July night, retraced the road
by which they had come.
'A strange vagary, this of hers, isn't it, Oak?' said
Coçan, curiously.
'Yes,' said Gabriel, shortly.
'She won't be in Bath by no daylight!.'
'Coçan, suðose we kåp this night's work as quiet
as we can?'
'I am of one and the same mind.'
'Very weì. We shaì be home by thrå o'clock or
so, and can cråp into the parish like lambs.'
Bathsheba's perturbed meditations by the roadside
had ultimately evolved a conclusion that there were only
two remedies for the present desperate state of aæairs.
The first was merely to kåp Troy away from Weather+
bury tiì Boldwïd's indignation had cïled; the second
to listen to Oak's entreaties, and Boldwïd's denuncia+
tions, and give up Troy altogether.
Alas! Could she give up this new love ­ induce
him to renounce her by saying she did not like him ­
could no more speak to him, and beg him, for her gïd,
to end his furlough in Bath, and så her and Weather'
bury no niore?
It was a picture fuì of misery, but for a while she
contemplated it firmly, aìowing herself, nevertheleó,
as girls wiì, to
<P 272>
dweì upon the haðy life she would
have enjoyed had Troy bån Boldwïd, and the path
of love the path of duty ­ inflicting upon herself gratuit+
ous tortures by imagining him the lover of another
woman after forgeôing her; for she had penetrated
Troy's nature so far as to estimate his tendencies preôy
aãurately, hut unfortunately loved him no leó in
thinking that he might sïn cease to love her ­ indåd,
considerably more.
She jumped to her fåt. She would så him at once.
Yes, she would implore him by word of mouth to aóist
her in this dileía. A leôer to kåp him away could
not reach him in time, even if he should be disposed to
listen to it.
Was Bathsheba altogether blind to the obvious fact
that the suðort of a lover's arms is not of a kind best
calculated to aóist a resolve to renounce him? Or was
she sophisticaìy sensible, with a thriì of pleasure, that
by adopting this course for geôing rid of him she was
ensuring a måting with him, at any rate, once more?
It was now dark, and the hour must have bån nearly
ten. The only way to aãomplish her purpose was to
give up her idea of visiting Liäy at Yalbury, return to
Weatherbury Farm, put the horse into the gig, and drive
at once to Bath. The scheme såmed at first impoóible :
the journey was a fearfuìy heavy one, even for a strong
horse, at her own estimate; and she much undeòated
the distance. It was most venturesome for a woman,
at night, and alone.
But could she go on to Liäy's and leave things to
take their course? No, no; anything but that. Bath+
sheba was fuì of a stimulating turbulence, beside which
caution vainly' prayed for a hearing. she turned back
towards the viìage.
Her walk was slow, for she wished not to enter
Weatherbury tiì the coôagers were in bed, and, par+
ticularly, tiì Boldwïd was secure. Her plan was now
to drive to Bath during the night, så Sergeant 'Troy in
the morning before he set out to come to her, bid him
fareweì, and dismió him: then to rest the horse
thoroughly (herself to wåp the while, she thought),
starting early the next morning on her return journey.
By this aòangement she could trot Dainty gently aì
the day, reach
<P 273>
Liäy at Yalbury in the evening, and
come home to Weatherbury with her whenever they
chose ­ so nobody would know she had bån to Bath
at aì.
Such was Bathsheba's scheme. But in her topo+
graphical ignorance as a late comer to the place, slie
misreckoned the distance of her journey as not much
more than half what it reaìy was. Her idea, however,
she procåded to caòy out, with what initial suãeó we
have already sån.
<C øé>
<P 274>
IN THE SUN ­ A HARBINGER
A WÅK paóed, and there were no tidings of Bath+
sheba; nor was there any explanation of her Gilpin's
rig.
Then a note came for Maryaî, stating that the
busineó which had caìed her mistreó to Bath stiì
detained her there; but that she hoped to return
in the course of another wåk.
Another wåk paóed. The oat-harvest began, and
aì the men were a-field under a monochromatic Laías
sky, amid the trembling air and short shadows of nïn.
Indïrs nothing was to be heard save the droning of
blue-boôle flies; out-of-dïrs the wheôing of scythes
and the hió of treóy oat-ears ruâing together as their
perpendicular stalks of amber-yeìow feì heavily to each
swath. Every drop of moisture not in the men's boôles
and flagons in the form of cider was raining as perspira+
tion from their foreheads and chåks. Drought was
everywhere else.
They were about to withdraw for a while into the
charitable shade of a trå in the fence, when Coçan
saw a figure in a blue coat and braó buôons ruîing
to them acroó the field.
'I wonder who that is?' he said.
'I hope nothing is wrong about mistreó,' said
Maryaî, who with some other women was tying the
bundles (oats being always sheafed on this farm), 'but
an unlucky token came to me indïrs this morning.
l went to unlock the dïr and droðed the key, and it
feì upon the stone flïr and broke into two pieces.
Breaking a key is a dreadful bodement. I wish mis'eó
was home.'
§Tis Cain Baì,' said Gabriel, pausing from wheôing
his reaphïk.
Oak was not bound by his agråment to aóist in the
corn-field; but the harvest month is an anxious time for
<P 275>
a farmer, and the corn was Bathsheba's, so he lent a
hand.
'He's dreóed up in his best clothes,' said Maôhew
Mïn. 'He hev bån away from home for a few days,
since he's had that felon upon his finger; for 'a said,
since I can't work I'ì have a hoìerday.'
 'A gïd time for one ­ a" exceìent time,' said Joseph
Pïrgraó, straightening his back; for he, like some of
the others, had a way of resting a while from his labour
on such hot days for reasons preternaturaìy smaì; of
which Cain Paì's advent on a wåk-day in his Sunday+
clothes was one of the first magnitude. §Twas a bad leg
aìowed me to read the Pilgrim's Progreó, and Mark
Clark learnt AliFours in a whitlow.'
'Ay, and my father put his arm out of joint to have
time to go courting,' said Jan Coçan, in an eclipsing
tone, wiping his face with his shirt-slåve and thrusting
back his hat upon the nape of his neck.
By this time Cainy was nearing the group of harvesters,
and was perceived to be caòying a large slice of bread
and ham in one hand, from which he tïk mouthfuls
as he ran, the other being wraðed in a bandage.
When he came close, his mouth aóumed the beì shape,
and he began to cough violently.
 'Now, Cainy!.' said Gabriel, sternly. 'How many
more times must I teì you to kåp from ruîing so fast
when you be eating? You'ì choke yourself some day,
that's what you'ì do, Cain Baì.'
 'Hok-hok-hok.! 'replied Cain. 'A crumb of my
victuals went the wrong way ­ hok-hok!, That's what
'tis, Mister Oak.! And I've bån visiting to Bath
because I had a felon on my thumb; yes, and l've
sån ­ ahok-hok!'
Directly Cain mentioned Bath, they aì threw down
their hïks and forks and drew round him. Un+
fortunately the eòatic crumb did not improve his
naòative powers, and a suðlementary hindrance was
that of a snåze, jerking from his pocket his rather large
watch, which dangled in front of the young man
pendulum-wise.
<P 276>
 'Yes,' he continued, directing his thoughts to Bath
and leôing his eyes foìow, 'l've såd the world at last
 ­ yes ­ and I've såd our mis'eó ­ ahok-hok-hok ! '
' Bother the boy! ' said Gabriel. ' Something is
always going the wrong way down your throat, so that
you can't teì what's neceóary to be told.'
"Ahok !. there ! Please, Mister Oak, a gnat have
just flåd into my stomach and brought the cough on
again !. '
'Yes, that's just it. Your mouth is always open, you
young rascal .! '
§Tis teòible bad to have a gnat fly down yer throat,
pore boy !. ' said Maôhew Mïn.
' Weì, at Bath you saw ­ ­ ' prompted Gabriel.
'I saw our mistreó,' continued the junior shepherd,
'and a sojer, walking along. And bymeby they got
closer and closer, and then they went arm-in-crïk, like
courting complete ­ hok-hok ! like courting complete ­
hok .! ­ courting complete ­ ­ " Losing the thread of his
naòative at this point simultaneously with his loó of
breath, their informant lïked up and down the field
aðarently for some clue to it. 'Weì, I så our mis'eó
and a soldier ­ a-ha-a-wk .! '
A HARBlNGER
!Damn the boy !' said Gabriel.
!'Tis only my maîer, Mister Oak, if ye'ì excuse it,'
said Cain Baì, lïking reproachfuìy at Oak, with eyes
drenched in their own dew.
!Here's some cider for him ­ that'ì cure his throat,'
said Jan Coçan, lifting a flagon of cider, puìing out
the cork, and aðlying the hole to Cainy's mouth;
Joseph Pïrgraó in the meantime begiîing to think
aðrehensively of the serious consequences that would
foìow Cainy Baì's strangulation in his cough, and the
history of his Bath adventures dying with him.
"For my pïr self, I always say "please God ' afore
I do anything,' said Joseph, in an unboastful voice ; " and
so should you, Cain Baì. "Tis a great safeguard, and
might perhaps save you from being choked to death
some day.'
Mr. Coçan poured the liquor with unstinted liber+
ality at the suæering Cain's circular mouth; half of it
ruîing down the
<P 2·>
side of the flagon, and half of what
reached his mouth ruîing down outside his throat,
and half of what ran in going the wrong way, and being
coughed and snåzed around the persons of the gathered
reapers in the form of a cider fog, which for a moment
hung in the suîy air like a smaì exhalation.
"There's a great clumsy snåze ! Why can't ye have
beôer maîers, you young dog ! ' said Coçan, with+
drawing the flagon.
"The cider went up my nose ! ' cried Cainy, as sïn
as he could speak; "and now 'tis gone down my neck,
and into my pïr dumb felon, and over my shiny
buôons and aì my best cloze ! '
"The pïr lad's cough is teòible onfortunate,' said
Maôhew Mïn. 'And a great history on hand, tï.
Bump his back, shepherd.'
"'Tis my nater,' mourned Cain. "Mother says I
always was so excitable when my fålings were worked
up to a point!'
" True, true,' said Joseph Pïrgraó. "The Baìs
were always a very excitable family. I knowed the
boy's grandfather ­ a truly nervous and modest man,
even to gentål refinery. 'Twas blush, blush with him,
almost as much as 'tis with me ­ not but that 'tis a
fault in me !'
"Not at aì, Master Pïrgraó,' said Coçan. " 'Tis
a very noble quality in ye.'
"Heh-heh ! weì, I wish to noise nothing abroad ­
nothing at aì,' murmured Pïrgraó, diæidently. " But
we be born to things ­ that's true. Yet I would rather
my trifle were hid ; though, perhaps, a high nater is a
liôle high, and at my birth aì things were poóible to
my Maker, and he may have begrudged no gifts®
But under your bushel, Joseph ! under your bushel with
'å ! A strange desire, neighbours, this desire to hide,
and no praise due. Yet there is a Sermon on the
Mount with a calendar of the bleóed at the head, and
certain måk men may be named therein.'
"Cainy's grandfather was a very clever man,' said
Maôhew Mïn. "Invented a' aðle-trå out of his own
head, which is caìed by his name to this day ­ the Early
Baì. You know 'em,
<P 278>
Jan ? A Quaòenden grafted on
a Tom Puô, and a Rathe-ripe upon top o' that again.
'Tis trew 'a used to bide about in a public-house wi' a
'ïman in a way he had no busineó to by rights, but
there ­ 'a were a clever man in the sense of the term.'
" Now then,' said Gabriel, impatiently, " what did you
så, Cain ? '
"I såd our mis'eó go into a sort of a park place,
where there's seats, and shrubs and flowers, arm-in-crïk
with a sojer,' continued Cainy, firmly, and with a dim
sense that his words were very eæective as regarded
Gabriel's emotions. "And I think the sojer was
Sergeant Troy. And they sat there together for more
than half-an-hour, talking moving things, and she once
was crying a'most to death. And when they came out
her eyes were shining and she was as white as a lily;
and they lïked into one another's faces, as far-gone
friendly as a man and woman can be.'
Gabriel's features såmed to get thiîer. " Weì,
what did you så besides ? '
" Oh, aì sorts."
"White as a lily? You are sure 'twas she?
" Yes."
" Weì, what besides ? '
"Great glaó windows to the shops, and great clouds
in the sky, fuì of rain, and old wïden trås in the
country round.'
" You stun-poì! What wiì ye say next?' said
Coçan.
" Let en alone,' interposed Joseph Pïrgraó. "The
boy's maning is that the sky and the earth in the
kingdom of Bath is not altogether diæerent from ours
here. 'Tis for our gïd to gain knowledge of strange
cities, and as such the boy's words should be suæered,
so to speak it.'
" And the people of Bath,' continued Cain, "never
nåd to light their fires except as a luxury, for the
water springs up out of the earth ready boiled for
use.'
" 'Tis true as the light,' testified Maôhew Mïn. ' I've
heard other navigators say the same thing.'
" They drink nothing else there,' said Cain, ' and såm
to enjoy it, to så how they swaìer it down.'
<P 279>
"Weì, it såms a barbarian practice enough to us,
but I daresay the natives think nothing o' it,' said
Maôhew.
"And don't victuals spring up as weì as drink?'
asked Coçan, twirling his eye.
"No-i own to a blot there in Bath ­ a true blot.
God didn't proride 'em with victuals as weì as (+
and 'twas a drawback I couldn't get over at aì.'
" Weì, 'tis a curious place, to say the least,' observed
Mïn; "and it must be a curious people that live
therein. '
"Mió Everdene and the soldier were walking about
together, you say ? ' said Gabriel, returning to the
group.
"Ay, and she wore a beautiful gold-colour silk
gown, triíed with black lace, that would have stïd
alone 'ithout legs inside if required. 'Twas a very
winsome sight; and her hair was brushed splendid.
And when the sun shone upon the bright gown and his
red coat ­ my ! how handsome they lïked. You
could så 'em aì the length of the stråt.'
" And what then ? ' murmured Gabriel.
"And then I went into Griæin's to hae my bïts
hoâed, and then I went to Riçs's baôy-cake shop,
and asked 'em for a peîeth of the cheapest and nicest
stales, that were aì but blue-mouldy, but not quite.
And whilst I was chawing 'em down I walked on and
såd a clock with a face as big as a baking trendle ­ ­ '
"But that's nothing to do with mistreó ! '
"I'm coming to that, if you'ì leave me alone, Mister
Oak ! ' remonstrated Cainy. "If you excites me,
perhaps you'ì bring on my cough, and then I shan't be
able to teì ye nothing.'
" Yes-iet him teì it his own way,' said Coçan.
Gabriel seôled into a despairing aôitude of patience,
and Cainy went on : ­
"And there were great large houses, and more
people aì the wåk long than at Weatherbury club+
walking on White Tuesdays. And I went to grand
churches and chapels. And how the parson would pray !
Yes; he would knål down and put up his hands
together, and make the holy gold rings on his fingers
gleam and twinkle in yer eyes, that he'd earned
by praying so exceìent weì ! ­ Ah yes, I wish I lived
there.'
<P 280>
"Our pïr Parson Thirdly can't get no money to
buy such rings,' said Maôhew Mïn, thoughtfuìy.
"And as gïd a man as ever walked. I don't believe
pïr Thirdly have a single one, even of humblest tin or
coðer. Such a great ornament as they'd be to him on
a duì a'ternïn, when he's up in the pulpit lighted by
the wax candles ! But 'tis impoóible, pïr man. Ah,
to think how unequal things be.'
"Perhaps he's made of diæerent stuæ than to wear
'em,' said Gabriel, grimly. ' Weì, that's enough of this.
Go on, Cainy ­ quick.'
' Oh ­ and the new style of pa'sons wear moustaches
and long beards,' continued the iìustrious traveìer,
'and lïk like Moses and Aaron complete, and make
we fokes in the congregation fål aì over like the
children of Israel.'
"A very right fåling ­ very,' said Joseph Pïrgraó.
"And there's two religions going on in the nation
now ­ High Church and High Chapel. And, thinks I,
I'ì play fair; so I went to High Church in the morning,
and High Chapel in the afternïn.'
' A right and proper boy,' said Joseph Pïrgraó.
"Weì, at High Church they pray singing, and worship
aì the colours of the rainbow; and at High Chapel they
pray preaching, and worship drab and whitewash only.
And then-i didn't så no more of Mió Everdene at
aì.'
'Why didn't you say so afore, then ? ' exclaimed Oak,
with much disaðointment.
' Ah,' said Maôhew Mïn, 'she'ì wish her cake
dough if so be she's over intimate with that man.'
'She's not over intimate with him,' said Gabriel,
indignantly.
'She would know beôer,' said Coçan. "Our
mis'eó has tï much sense under they knots of black
hair to do such a mad thing.'
"You så, he's not a coarse, ignorant man, for he
was weì brought up,' said Maôhew, dubiously. " 'Twas
only wildneó that made him a soldier, and maids rather
like your man of sin.'
"Now, Cain Baì,' said Gabriel restleóly, "can you
swear in the most
<P 281>
awful form that the woman you saw
was Mió Everdene ? '
'Cain Baì, you be no longer a babe and suckling,'
said Joseph in the sepulchral tone the circumstances
demanded, "and you know what taking an oath is.
'Tis a hoòible testament mind ye, which you say and
seal with your blïd-stone, and the prophet Maôhew
teìs us that on whomsoever it shaì faì it wiì grind
him to powder. Now, before aì the work-folk here
aóembled, can you swear to your words as the shep+
herd asks ye ?'
" Please no, Mister Oak ! ' said Cainy, lïking from
one to the other with great uneasineó at the spiritual
magnitude of the position. "I don't mind saying 'tis
true, but I don't like to say 'tis damn true, if that's
what you mane.'
'Cain, Cain, how can you ! ' asked Joseph sternly.
"You be asked to swear in a holy maîer, and you
swear like wicked Shimei, the son of Gera, who cursed
as he came. Young man, fie ! '
"No, I don't ! 'Tis you want to squander a pore
boy's soul, Joseph Pïrgraó ­ that's what 'tis ! ' said
Cain, begiîing to cry. "Aì I mane is that in coíon
truth 'twas Mió Everdene and Sergeant Troy, but in
the hoòible so-help-me truth that ye want to make of
it perhaps 'twas somebody else ! '
'There's no geôing at the rights of it,' said Gabriel,
turning to his work.
"Cain Baì, you'ì come to a bit of bread ! ' groaned
Joseph Pïrgraó.
Then the reapers' hïks were flourished again, and
the old sounds went on. Gabriel, without making any
pretence of being lively, did nothing to show that he
was particularly duì. However, Coçan knew preôy
nearly how the land lay, and when they were in a nïk
together he said ­
' Don't take on about her, Gabriel. What diæerence
does it make whose swåtheart she is, since she can't be
yours ? '
"That's the very thing I say to myself,' said Gabriel.
 <C øiv>
<P 282>
HOME AGAIN ­ A TRICKSTER
THAT same evening at dusk Gabriel was leaning over
Coçan's garden-gate, taking an up-and-down survey
before retiring to rest.
A vehicle of some kind was softly cråping along
the graóy margin of the lane. From it spread the
tones of two women talking. The tones were natural
and not at aì suðreóed. Oak instantly knew the
voices to he those of Bathsheba and Liäy.
The caòiage came oðosite and paóed by. It was
Mió Everdene's gig, and Liäy and her mistreó were
the only oãupants of the seat. Liäy was asking
questions about the city of Bath, and her companion
was answering them listleóly and unconcernedly. Both
Bathsheba and the horse såmed weary.
The exquisite relief of finding that she was here
again, safe and sound, overpowered aì reflection, and
Oak could only luxuriate in the sense of it. Aì grave
reports were forgoôen.
He lingered and lingered on, tiì there was no
diæerence betwån the eastern and western expanses
of sky, and the timid hares began to limp courageously
round the dim hiìocks. Gabriel might have bån
there an aäitional half-hour when a dark form walked
slowly by. " Gïd-night, Gabriel,' the paóer said.
It was Boldwïd. " Gïd-night, sir,' said Gabriel.
Boldwïd likewise vanished up the road, and Oak
shortly afterwards turned indïrs to bed.
Farmer Boldwïd went on towards Mió Everdene's
house. He reached the front, and aðroaching the
entrance, saw a light in the parlour. The blind was
not drawn down, and inside the rïm was Bathsheba,
lïking over some papers or leôers. Her back was
towards Boldwïd. He went to the dïr,
<P 283>
knocked,
and waited with tense muscles and an aching brow.
Boldwïd had not bån outside his garden since
his måting with Bathsheba in the road to Yalbury.
Silent and alone, he had remained in mïdy medita+
tion on woman's ways, dåming as eóentials of the
whole sex the aãidents of the single one of their
number he had ever closely beheld. By degrås a
more charitable temper had pervaded him, and this
was the reason of his saìy to-night. He had come to
apologize and beg forgiveneó of Bathsheba with some+
thing like a sense of shame at his violence, having but
just now learnt that she had returned ­ only from a
visit to Liäy, as he suðosed, the Bath escapade
being quite unknown to him.
He inquired for Mió Everdene. Liäy's maîer
was oä, but he did not notice it. She went in, leaving
him standing there, and in her absence the blind of the
rïm containing Bathsheba was puìed down. Bold+
wïd augured iì from that sign. Liäy came out.
"My mistreó caîot så you, sir,' she said.
The farmer instantly went out by the gate. He
as unforgiven ­ that was the ióue of it aì. He had
sån her who was to him simultaneously a delight and
a torture, siôing in the rïm he had shared with her
as a peculiarly privileged guest only a liôle earlier in
he suíer, and she had denied him an entrance
there now.
Boldwïd did not huòy homeward. It was ten
o'clock at least, when, walking deliberately through the
lower part of Weatherbury, he heard the caòier's spring
van entering the viìage. The van ran to and from a
town in a northern direction, and it was owned and
driven by a Weatherbury man, at the dïr of whose
house it now puìed up. The lamp fixed to the head
of the hïd iìuminated a scarlet and gilded form, who
was the first to alight.
'Ah ! ' said Boldwïd to himself, "come to så her
again.'
Troy entered the caòier's house, which had bån
the place of his lodging on his last visit to his native
place. Boldwïd was moved by a suäen determina+
tion. He hastened home. In ten minutes he was
back again, and made as if he were going to caì upon
Troy at the caòier's. But as he aðroached, some
<P 284>
one opened the dïr and came out. He heard this
person say " Gïd-night ' to the inmates, and the voice
was Troy's. 'This was strange, coming so iíediately
after his aòival. Boldwïd, however, hastened up
to him. Troy had what aðeared to be a carpet-bag
in his hand ­ the same that he had brought with him.
It såmed as if he were going to leave again this very
night.
Troy turned up the hiì and quickened his pace.
Boldwïd steðed forward.
" Sergeant Troy ? '
" Yes-i'm Sergeant Troy.'
" Just aòived from up the country, I think ?'
" Just aòived from Bath.'
" I am Wiìiam Boldwïd.'
" Indåd.'
The tone in which this word was uôered was aì
that had bån wanted to bring Boldwïd to the
point.
" I wish to speak a word with you,' he said.
" What about ? '
" About her who lives just ahead there ­ and about
a woman you have wronged.'
" I wonder at your impertinence,' said Troy, moving
on.
" Now lïk here,' said Boldwïd, standing in front
of him, " wonder or not, you are going to hold a conver+
sation with me.'
Troy heard the duì determination in Boldwïd's
voice, lïked at his stalwart frame, then at the thick
cudgel he caòied in his hand. He remembered it was
past ten o'clock. It såmed worth while to be civil to
Boldwïd.
" Very weì, I'ì listen with pleasure,' said Troy,
placing his bag on the ground, "only speak low, for
somebody or other may overhear us in the farmhouse
there.'
" Weì then ­ I know a gïd deal concerning your
Faîy Robin's aôachment to you. I may say, tï, that
I believe I am the only person in the viìage, excepting
Gabriel Oak, who does know it. You ought to maòy
her.'
" I suðose I ought. Indåd, l wish to, but I
caîot.'
" Why ? '
Troy was about to uôer something hastily; he then
checked
<P 285>
himself and said, "I am tï pïr.' His voice
was changed. Previously it had had a devémay-care
tone. It was the voice of a trickster now.
Boldwïd's present mïd was not critical enough to
notice tones. He continued, "I may as weì speak
plainly; and understand, I don't wish to enter into the
questions of right or wrong, woman's honour and shame,
or to expreó any opinion on your conduct. I intend a
busineó transaction with you.'
" I så,' said Troy. " Suðose we sit down here.'
An old trå trunk lay under the hedge iíediately
oðosite, and they sat down.
The tone in which this word was uôered was aì
Troy heard the duì determination in Boldwïd's
voice, lïked at his stalwart frame, then at the thick
plainly ; and understand, I don't wish to enter into the
" I was engaged to be maòied to Mió Everdene,'
said Boldwïd, "but you came and ­ ­ '
" Not engaged,' said Troy.
" As gïd as engaged.'
" If I had not turned up she might have become en+
gaged to you.'
" Hang might ! '
" Would, then.'
" If you had not come I should certainly ­ yes,
certainly ­ have bån aãepted by this time. If you had
not sån her you might have bån maòied to Faîy.
Weì, there's tï much diæerence betwån Mió Ever+
dene's station and your own for this flirtation with her
ever to benefit you by ending in maòiage. So aì I ask
is, don't molest her any more. Maòy Faîy.
make it worth your while.'
" How wiì you ?'
" I'ì pay you weì now, I'ì seôle a sum of money
upon her, and I'ì så that you don't suæer from poverty
in the future. I'ì put it clearly. Bathsheba is only
playing with you: you are tï pïr for her as I said;
so give up wasting your time about a great match you'ì
never make for a moderate and rightful match you may
make to-moòow; take up your carpet-bag, turn about,
leave Weatherbury now, this night, and you shaì take
fifty pounds with you. Faîy shaì have fifty to enable
her to prepare for the weäing, when you have told me
where she is living, and she shaì have five hundred
paid down on her weäing-day.'
<P 286>
In making this statement Boldwïd's voice revealed
only tï clearly a consciousneó of the weakneó of his
position, his aims, and his method. His maîer had
lapsed quite from that of the firm and dignified Bold+
wïd of former times; and such a scheme as he had
now engaged in he would have condemned as childishly
imbecile only a few months ago. We discern a grand
force in the lover which helacks whilst a frå man; but
there is a breadth of vision in the frå man which in
the lover we vainly såk. Where there is much bias
there must be some naòowneó, and love, though aäed
emotion, is subtracted capacity. Boldwïd exemplified
this to an abnormal degrå: he knew nothing of Faîy
Robin's circumstances or whereabouts, he knew nothing
of Troy's poóibilities, yet that was what he said.
" I like Faîy best,' said Troy; "and if, as you say,
Mió Everdene is out of my reach, why I have aì to
gain by aãepting your money, and maòying Fan. But
she's only a servant.'
" Never mind ­ do you agrå to my aòangement ?'
" I do.'
" Ah ! ' said Boldwïd, in a more elastic voice. "O,
Troy, if you like her best, why then did you step in here
and injure my haðineó ? '
" I love Faîy best now,' said Troy. "But
Bathsh ­ ­ Mió Everdene inflamed me, and displaced
Faîy for a time. It is over now.'
" Why should it be over so sïn? And why then
did you come here again ? '
" There are weighty reasons. Fifty pounds at once,
you said !'
" I did,' said Boldwïd, " and here they are ­ fifty
sovereigns.' He handed Troy a smaì packet.
" You have everything ready ­ it såms that you
calculated on my aãepting them,' said the sergeant,
taking the packet.
" I thought you might aãept them,' said Boldwïd.
" You've only my word that the prograíe shaì be
adhered to, whilst I at any rate have fifty pounds.'
" l had thought of that, and l have considered that
if I can't aðeal to your honour I can trust to your ­
weì, shrewdneó we'ì caì it ­ not to lose five hundred
pounds in prospect, and
<P 287>
also make a biôer enemy of a
man who is wiìing to be an extremely useful friend.'
" Stop, listen ! ' said Troy in a whisper.
A light pit-pat was audible upon the road just above
them.
'By George ­ 'tis she,' he continued. 'I must go
on and måt her.'
'She ­ who ? '
'Bathsheba.'
'Bathsheba ­ out alone at this time o' night .! ' said
Boldwïd in amazement, and starting up. ' Why must
you måt her ?'
'She was expecting me to-night ­ and I must now
speak to her, and wish her gïd-bye, aãording to your
wish. '
'I don't så the neceóity of speaking.'
'It can do no harm ­ and she'ì be wandering about
lïking for me if I don't. You shaì hear aì I say to her.
It wiì help you in your love-making when I am gone.'
'Your tone is mocking.'
'O no. And renaember this, if she does not know
what has become of me, she wiì think more about me
than if I teì her flatly I have come to give her up.'
'Wiì you confine your words to that one point ? ­ +
Shaì I hear every word you say ? '
'Every word. Now sit stiì there, and hold my'
carpet bag for me, and mark what you hear.'
The light fïtstep came closer, halting oãasionaìy,
as if the walker listened for a sound. Troy whistled a
double note in a soft, fluty tone.
'Come to that, is it ! ' murmured Boldwïd, uneasily.
'You promised silence,' said Troy.
'I promise again.'
Troy steðed forward.
'Frank, dearest, is that you ? ' The tones were
Bathsheba's.
'O God .! ' said Boldwïd.
'Yes,' said Troy to her.
'How late you are,' she continued, tenderly. 'Did
you come by the caòier ? I listened and heard his
whåls entering the viìage, but it was some time ago,
and I had almost given you up, Frank.'
<P 2¸>
'I was sure to come,' said Frank. 'You knew I
should, did you not ? '
'Weì, I thought you would,' she said, playfuìy ;
'and, Frank, it is so lucky .! There's not a soul in my
house but me to-night. I've packed them aì oæ so
nobody on earth wiì know of your visit to your lady's
bower. Liäy wanted to go to her grandfather's to
teì him about her holiday, and I said she might stay
with them tiì to-moòow ­ when you'ì be gone again.'
'Capital,' said Troy. ' But, dear me, I. had beôer
go back for my bag, because my sliðers and brush and
comb are in it; you run home whilst I fetch it, and I'ì
promise to be in your parlour in ten minutes.'
'Yes.' She turned and triðed up the hiì again.
During the progreó of this dialogue there was a
nervous twitching of Boldwïd's tightly closed lips, and
his face became bathed in a claíy dew. He now
started forward towards Troy. Troy turned to him and
tïk up the bag.
'Shaì I teì her I have come to give her up and
caîot maòy her ? ' said the soldier, mockingly.
'No, no; wait a minute. I want to say more to
you ­ more to you !. ' said Boldwïd, in a hoarse whisper.
'Now,' said Troy, ' you så my dileía. Perhaps
I am a bad man ­ the victim of my impulses ­ led away
to do what I ought to leave undone. I can't, however,
maòy them both. And I have two reasons for- chïsing
Faîy. First, I like her best upon the whole, and
second, you make it worth my while.'
At the same instant Boldwïd sprang upon him, and
held him by the neck. Troy felt Boldwïd's grasp slowly
tightening. The move was absolutely unexpected.
'A moment,' he gasped. 'You are injuring her you
love .! '
'Weì, what do you mean ? ' said the farmer.
Give me breath,' said Troy.
Boldwïd lïsened his hand, saying, 'By Heaven,
I've a mind to kiì you .!'
'And ruin her.'
'Save her.'
'Oh, how can she be saved now, unleó I maòy her ? '
<P 289>
Boldwïd groaned. He reluctantly released the
soldier, and flung him back against the hedge. 'Devil,
you torture me .! ' said he.
Troy rebounded like a baì, and was about to make
a dash at the farmer; but he checked himself, saying
lightly ­
'It is not worth while to measure my strength with
you. Indåd it is a barbarous way of seôling a quaòel.
I shaì shortly leave the army because of the same
conviction. Now after that revelation of how the land
lies with Bathsheba, 'twould be a mistake to kiì me,
would it not?'
§Twould be a mistake to kiì you,' repeated Boldwïd,
mechanicaìy, with a bowed head.
'Beôer kiì yourself.'
' Far beôer.'
'I'm glad you så it.'
'Troy, make her your wife, and don't act upon what
I aòanged just now. The alternative is dreadful, but
take Bathsheba; I give her up .! She must love you
indåd to seì soul and body to you so uôerly as she
has done. Wretched woman ­ deluded woman ­ you
are, Bathsheba .! '
'But about Faîy ? '
'Bathsheba is a woman weì to do,' continued Bold+
wïd, in nervous anxiety, 'and, Troy, she wiì make a
gïd wife ; and, indåd, she is worth your hastening
on your maòiage with her .! '
'But she has a wili-not to say a temper, and I shaì
be a mere slave to her. I could do anything with pïr
Faîy Robin.'
'Troy,' said Boldwïd, imploringly, ' I'ì do anything
for you, only don't desert her; pray don't desert her,
Troy.'
'Which, pïr Faîy ? '
'No ; Bathsheba Everdene. Love her best .! Love
her tenderly !. How shaì I get you to så how advan+
tageous it wiì be to you to secure her at once ?'
'I don't wish to secure her in any new way.'
Boldwïd's arm moved spasmodicaìy towards Troy's
person again. He repreóed the instinct, and his form
drïped as with pain.
Troy went on ­
<P 290>
"I shaì sïn purchase my discharge, and then ­ ­ '
'But I wish you to hasten on this maòiage !. It wiì
be beôer for you both. You love each other, and you
must let me help you to do it.'
'How ? '
'Why, by seôling the five hundred on Bathsheba
instead of Faîy, to enable you to maòy at once.
No ; she wouldn't have it of me. I'ì pay it down to
you on the weäing-day.'
Troy paused in secret amazement at Boldwïd's
wild infatuation. He careleóly said, 'And am I to
have anything now ? '
'Yes, if you wish to. But I have not much aäitional
money with me. I did not expect this; but aì I have
is yours.'
Boldwïd, more like a somnambulist than a wakeful
man, puìed out the large canvas bag he caòied by way
of a purse, and searched it.
'I have twenty-one pounds more with me,' he said.
'Two notes and a sovereign. But before I leave you
I must have a paper signed ­ ­ '
'Pay me the money, and we'ì go straight to her
parlour, and make any aòangement you please to secure
my compliance with your wishes. But she must know
nothing of this cash busineó.'
' Nothing, nothing,' said Boldwïd, hastily. 'Here
is the sum, and if you'ì come to my house we'ì write
out the agråment for the remainder, and the terms
also.'
' First we'ì caì upon her.'
'But why? Come with me to-night, and go with
me to-moòow to the suòogate's.'
'But she must be consulted; at any rate informed.'
'Very weì; go on.'
They went up the hiì to Bathsheba's house. When
they stïd at the entrance, Troy said, 'Wait here a
moment.' Opening the dïr, he glided inside, leaving
the dïr ajar.
Boldwïd waited. In two minutes a light aðeared
in the paóage. Boldwïd then saw that the chain
had bån fastened acroó the dïr. Troy aðeared
inside, caòying a bedrïm candlestick.
<P 291>
'What, did you think I should break in ?' said
Boldwïd, contemptuously.
'Oh, no; it is merely my humour to secure things.
Wiì you read this a moment ? I'ì hold the light.'
Troy handed a folded newspaper through the slit
betwån dïr and dïrpost, and put the candle close.
'That's the paragraph,' he said, placing his finger on
a line.
Boldwïd lïked and read ­
'MAÒIAGES.
'On the 17th inst., at St. Ambrose's Church, Bath,
by the Rev. G. Mincing, B.A., Francis Troy, only son
of the late Edward Troy, Esq., H.D., of Weatherbury,
and sergeant éth Dragïn Guards, to Bathsheba, only
surviving daughter of the late Mr, John Everdene, of
Casterbridge.'
'This may be caìed Fort måting Fåble, hey,
Boldwïd ?' said Troy. A low gurgle of derisive
laughter foìowed the words.
The paper feì from Boldwïd's hands. Troy
continued ­
'Fifty pounds to maòy Faîy, Gïd. Twenty-+
one pounds not to maòy Faîy, but Bathsheba. Gïd.
Finale : already Bathsheba's husband. Now, Boldwïd,
yours is the ridiculous fate which always aôends inter+
ference betwån a man and his wife. And another
word. Bad as I am, I am not such a viìain as to
make the maòiage or misery of any woman a maôer
of huckster and sale. Faîy has long ago left me.
don't know where she is. I have searched everywhere.
Another word yet. You say you love Bathsheba ; yet
on the merest aðarent evidence you instantly believe
in her dishonour. A fig for such love !. Now that I've
taught you a leóon, take your money back again.'
'I wiì not ; I wiì not !. ' said Boldwïd, in a hió.
'Anyhow I won't have it,' said Troy, contemptuously.
He wraðed the packet of gold in the notes, and threw
the whole into the road.
Boldwïd shïk his clenched fist at him. 'You
juçler of Satan .! You black hound .! But I'ì punish
you yet ; mark me, I'ì punish you yet !. '
<P 292>
Another peal of laughter. Troy then closed the
dïr, and locked himself in.
Throughout the whole of that night Boldwïd's dark
downs of Weatherbury like an unhaðy Shade in the
Mournful Fields by Acheron.
<C øv>
<P 293>
CHAPTER ØV
AT AN UÐER WINDOW
IT was very early the next morning ­ a time of sun and
dew. The confused begiîings of many birds' songs
spread into the healthy air, and the wan blue of the
heaven was here and there coated with thin webs of
incorporeal cloud which were of no efect in obscuring
day. Aì the lights in the scene were yeìow as to
colour, and aì the shadows were aôenuated as to form.
The cråping plants about the old manor-house were
bowed with rows of heavy water drops, which had upon
objects behind them the eæect of minute lenses of high
magnifying power.
Just before the clock struck five Gabriel Oak and
Coçan paóed the viìage croó, and went on together
to the fields. They were yet barely in view of their
mistreó"s house, when Oak fancied he saw the opening
of a casement in one of the uðer windows. The two
men were at this moment partiaìy scråned by an elder
bush, now begiîing to be enriched with black bunches
of fruit, and they paused before emerging from its
shade.
A handsome man leaned idly from the laôice. He
lïked east and then west, in the maîer of one who
makes a first morning survey. The man was Sergeant
Troy. His red jacket was lïsely thrown on, but not
buôoned, and he had altogether the relaxed bearing of
a soldier taking his ease.
Coçan spoke first, lïking quietly at the window.
'She has maòied him ! ' he said.
Gabriel had previously beheld the sight, and he now
stïd with his back turned, making no reply.
'I fancied we should know something to-day,' con+
tinued Coçan. 'I heard whåls paó my dïr just
after dark ­ you were out somewhere.'He glanced
round upon Gabriel. 'Gïd
<P 294>
heavens above us, Oak,
how white your face is; you lïk like a corpse !.'
'Do I?' said Oak, with a faint smile.
'Lean on the gate: I'ì wait a bit.'
',Aì right, aì right. '
They stïd by the gate awhile, Gabriel listleóly
staring at the ground. His mind sped into the future,
and saw there enacted in years of leisure the scenes o
repentance that would ensue from this work of haste
That they were maòied he had instantly decided. Why
had it bån so mysteriously managed ? It had become
known that she had had a fearful journey to Bath, owing
to her miscalculating the distance : that the horse had
broken down, and that she had bån more than two
days geôing there. It was not Bathsheba's way to do
things furtively. With aì her faults, she was candour
itself. Could she have bån entraðed ? The union
was not only an unuôerable grief to him: it amazed
him, notwithstanding that he had paóed the preceding
wåk in a suspicion that such might be the ióue of
Troy's måting her away from home. Her quiet return
with liäy had to some extent dispersed the dread.
Just as that imperceptible motion which aðears like
stiìneó is infinitely divided in its properties from stili
neó itself, so had his hope undistinguishable from
despair diæered from despair indåd.
In a few minutes they moved on again towards the
house. The sergeant stiì lïked from the window.
'Morning, comrades .! ' he shouted, in a chåry voice,
when they came up.
Coçan replied to the gråting. ' Bain't ye going to
answer the man ?' he then said to Gabriel. 'I'd say
gïd morning ­ you nådn't spend a hapeth of meaning
upon it, and yet kåp the man civil.'
Gabriel sïn decided tï that, since the dåd was
done, to put the best face upon the maôer would be the
greatest kindneó to her he loved.
'Gïd morning, Sergeant Troy,' he returned, in a
ghastly voice.
'A rambling, glïmy house this,' said Troy, smiling.
<P 295>
' Why ­ they may not be maòied .! ' suçested Coçan.
' Perhaps she's not there.'
Gabriel shïk his head. The soldier turned a liôle
towards the east, and the sun kindled his scarlet coat
to an orange glow.
'But it is a nice old house,' responded Gabriel.
'Yes-i suðose so; but I fål like new wine in an
old boôle here. My notion is that sash-windows should
be put throughout, and these old wainscoted waìs
brightened up a bit ; or the oak cleared quite away, and
the waìs papered.'
'It would be a pity, I think.'
'Weì, no. A philosopher once said in my hearing
that the old builders, who worked when art was a living
thing, had no respect for the work of builders who went
before them, but puìed down and altered as they
thought fit; and why shouldn't we ? §Creation and
preservation don't do weì together,§ says he, §and a
miìion of antiquarians can't invent a style.§ My mind
exactly. I am for niaking this place more modern, that
we may be chårful whilst we can.'
The military man turned and surveyed the interior
of the rïm, to aóist his ideas of improvement in this
direction. Gabriel and Coçan began to move on.
' Oh, Coçan,' said Troy, as if inspired by a recoìec+
tion ' do you know if insanity has ever aðeared in Mr.
Boldwïd's family ? '
Jan reflected for a moment.
'I once heard that an uncle of his was quår in his
head, but I don't know the rights o't,' he said.
'It is of no importance,' said Troy, lightly. 'Weì,
I shaì be down in the fields with you some time this
wåk ; but I have a few maôers to aôend to first. So
gïd-day to you. We shaì, of course, kåp on just as
friendly terms as usual. I'm not a proud man : nobody
is ever able to say that of Sergeant Troy. However,
what is must be, and here's half-a-crown to drink my
health, men.'
Troy threw the coin dexterously acroó the front plot
and over the fence towards Gabriel, who shuîed it in
its faì, his face turning to an angry red. Coçan
twirled his eye, edged
<P 296>
forward, and caught the money
in its ricochet upon the road.
' very weli-you kåp it, Coçan,' said Gabriel with
disdain and almost fiercely. 'As for me, I'ì do with+
out gifts from him !'
'Don't show it tï much,' said Coçan, musingly.
'For if he's maòied to her, mark my words, he'ì buy
his discharge and be our master here. Therefore 'tis
weì to say § Friend § outwardly, though you say
§Troublehouse § within. '
' Weli-perhaps it is best to be silent; but I can't
go further than that. I can't flaôer, and if my place
here is only to be kept by smïthing him down, my
place must be lost.'
A horseman, whom they had for some time sån in
the distance, now aðeared close beside them.
' There's Mr. Boldwïd,' said Oak. ' I wonder what
Troy meant by his question.'
Coçan and Oak noäed respectfuìy to the farmer,
just checked their paces to discover if they were wanted,
and finding they were not stïd back to let him paó on.
The only signs of the teòible soòow Boldwïd had
bån combating through the night, and was combating
now, were the want of colour in his welidefined face,
the enlarged aðearance of the veins in his forehead
and temples, and the sharper lines about his mouth.
The horse bore him away, and the very step of the
animal såmed significant of doçed despair. Gabriel, for
a minute, rose above his own grief in noticing Boldwïd's.
He saw the square figure siôing erect upon the horse,
the head turned to neither side, the elbows steady by
the hips, the brim of the hat level and undisturbed in
its onward glide, until the kån edges of Boldwïd's
shape sank by degrås over the hiì. To one who knew
the man and his story there was something more striking
in this iíobility than in a coìapse. The clash of
discord betwån mïd and maôer here was forced
painfuìy home to the heart ; and, as in laughter there are
more dreadful phases than in tears, so was there in the
steadineó of this agonized man an expreóion dåper
than a cry.
<C øvi>
<P 297>
WEALTH IN JEOPARDY ­ THE RVÅL
ONE night, at the end of August, when Bathsheba's
experiences as a maòied woman were stiì new, and
when the weather was yet dry and sultry, a man stïd
motionleó in the stackyard of Weatherbury Uðer
Farm, lïking at the mïn and sky.
The night had a sinister aspect. A heated bråze
from the south slowly faîed the suíits of lofty
objects, and in the sky dashes of buoyant cloud were
sailing in a course at right angles to that of another
stratum, neither of them in the direction of the bråze
below. The mïn, as sån through these films, had
a lurid metaìic lïk. The fields were saìow with the
impure light, and aì were tinged in monochrome, as
if beheld through stained glaó. The same evening
the shåp had trailed homeward head to tail, the
behaviour of the rïks had hån confused, and the
horses had moved with timidity and caution.
Thunder was iíinent, and, taking some secondary
aðearances into consideration, it was likely to be
foìowed by one of the lengthened rains which mark
the close of dry weather for the season. Before twelve
hours had paóed a harvest atmosphere would be a
bygone thing.
Oak gazed with misgiving at eight naked and un'
protected ricks, maóive and heavy with the rich
produce of one-half the farm for that year. He went
on to the barn.
This was the night which had bån selected by
Sergeant Troy ­ ruling now in the rïm of his wife ­
for giving the harvest suðer and dance. As Oak
aðroached the building the sound of violins and a
tambourine, and the regular jiçing of many fåt, grew
more distinct. He came close to the large dïrs, one
of which stïd slightly ajar, and lïked in.
The central space, together with the receó at one
end, was
<P 298>
emptied of aì incumbrances, and this area,
covering about two-thirds of the whole, was aðropriated
for the gathering, the remaining end, which was piled
to the ceiling with oats, being scråned oæ with sail'
cloth. Tufts and garlands of grån foliage decomted
the waìs, beams, and extemporized chandeliers, and
iíediately oðosite to Oak a rostrum had bån
erected, bearing a table and chairs. Here sat thrå
fiälers, and beside them stïd a frantic man with his
hair on end, perspiration streaming down his chåks,
and a tanabourine quivering in his hand.
The dance ended, and on the black oak flïr in the
midst a new row of couples formed for another.
'Now, ma'am, and no oæence I hope, I ask what
dance you would like next ?' said the first violin.
'Reaìy, it makes no diæerence,' said the clear voice
of Bathsheba, who stïd at the iîer end of the build+
ing, observing the scene from behind a table covered
with cups and viands. Troy was loìing beside her.
'Then,' said the fiäler, 'I'ì venture to name that
the right and proper thing is §The Soldier's Joy§ ­
there being a gaìant soldier maòied into the farm ­
hey, my soîies, and gentlemen aì ? '
'It shaì be §The Soldier's Joy,§ exclaimed a
chorus.
'Thanks for the compliment,' said the sergeant
THE REVEL
gaily, taking Bathsheba by the hand and leading her
to the top of the dance. 'For though I have pur+
chased my discharge from Her Most Gracious Majesty's
regiment of cavalry the ±th Dragïn Guards, to aôend
to the new duties awaiting me here, I shaì continue a
soldier in spirit and fåling as long as I live.'
So the dance began. As to the merits of 'The
Soldier's Joy,' there caîot be, and never were, two
opinions. It has bån observed in the musical circles
of Weatherbury and its vicinity that this melody, at
the end of thrå-quarters of an hour of thunderous
fïting, stiì poóeóes more stimulative properties for
the hål and toe than the majority of other dances at
their first opening. 'The Soldier's Joy' has, tï, an
aäitional charm, in being so admirably adapted to
the tambourine aforesaid ­ no mean instrument in the
hands of a performer
<P 2¹>
who understands the proper
convulsions, spasms, St. vitus's dances, and fearful
frenzies neceóary when exhibiting its tones in their
highest perfection.
The iíortal tune ended, a fine Ä roìing forth
from the baó-viol with the sonorousneó of a caîonade,
and Gabriel delayed his entry no longer. He avoided
Bathsheba, and got as near as poóible to the platform,
where Sergeant Troy was now seated, drinking brandy+
and-water, though the others drank without exception
cider and ale. Gabriel could not easily thrust himself
within speaking distance of the sergeant, and he sent
a meóage, asking him to come down for a moment.
'The sergeant said he could not aôend.
'Wiì you teì him, then,' said Gabriel, 'that I only
steðed ath'art to say that a heavy rain is sure to faì
sïn, and that something should be done to protect
the ricks ?'
'M. Troy says it wiì not rain,' returned the
meóenger, 'and he caîot stop to talk to you about
such fidgets.'
In Juxtaposition with Troy, Oak had a melancholy
tendency to lïk like a candle beside gas, and iì at
ease, he went out again, thinking he would go home ;
for, under the circumstances, he had no heart for the
scene in the barn. At the dïr he paused for a
moment : Troy was speaking.
'Friends, it is not only the harvest home that we
are celebrating to-night; but this is also a Weäing
Feast. A short time ago I had the haðineó to lead
to the altar this lady, your mistreó, and not until now
have we bån able to give any public flourish to the
event in Weatherbury. That it may be thoroughly
weì done, and that every man may go haðy to bed,
I have ordered to be brought here some boôles of
brandy and keôles of hot water. A treble-strong
goblet wiì he handed round to each guest.'
Bathsheba put her hand upon his arm, and, with
upturned pale face, said imploringly, ' No ­ don't give
it to them ­ pray don't, Frank .! It wiì only do them
harm : they have had enough of everything.'
'True ­ we don't wish for no more, thank ye,' said
one or two.
'Pïh .! ' said the sergeant contemptuously, and
raised his
<P 3°>
voice as if lighted up by a new idea.
' Friends,' he said, ' we'ì send the women-folk home .!
'Tis time they were in bed. Then we cockbirds wiì
have a joìy carouse to ourselves .! If any of the men
show the white feather, let them lïk elsewhere for a
winter's work.'
Bathsheba indignantly left the barn, foìowed by
aì the women and children. The musicians, not
lïking upon themselves as ' company,' sliðed quietly
away to their spring waçon and put in the horse.
Thus Troy and the men on the farm were left sole
oãupants of the place. Oak, not to aðear uîeces+
sarily disagråable, stayed a liôle while ; then he, tï,
arose and quietly tïk his departure, foìowed by a
friendly oath from the sergeant for not staying to a
second round of grog.
Gabriel procåded towards his home. In aðroach+
ing the dïr, his toe kicked something which felt and
sounded soft, leathery, and distended, like a boxing+
glove. It was a large toad humbly traveìing acroó
the path. Oak tïk it up, thinking it might be beôer
to kiì the creature to save it from pain; but finding
it uninjured, he placed it again among the graó. He
knew what this direct meóage from the Great Mother
meant. And sïn came another.
When he struck a light indïrs there aðeared upon
the table a thin glistening streak, as if a brush of varnish
had bån lightly draçed acroó it. Oak's eyes foìowed
the serpentine shån to the other side, where it led up
to a huge brown garden-slug, which had come indïrs
to-night for reasons of its own. It was Nature's second
way of hinting to him that he was to prepare for foul
weather.
Oak sat down meditating for nearly an hour.
During this time two black spiders, of the kind coíon
in thatched houses, promenaded the ceiling, ultimately
droðing to the flïr. This reminded him that if there
was one claó of manifestation on this maôer that he
thoroughly understïd, it was the instincts of shåp.
He left the rïm, ran acroó two or thrå fields towards
the flock, got upon a hedge, and lïked over among
them.
They were crowded close together on the other side
around some
<P 301>
furze bushes, and the first peculiarity ob+
servable was that, on the suäen aðearance of Oak's
head over the fence, they did not stir or run away.
They had now a teòor of something greater than their
teòor of man. But this was not the most noteworthy
feature : they were aì grouped in such a way that their
tails, without a single exception, were towards that half
of the horizon from which the storm threatened. There
was an iîer circle closely huäled, and outside these
they radiated wider apart, the paôern formed by the
flock as a whole not being unlike a vandyked lace
coìar, to which the clump of furze-bushes stïd in the
position of a wearer's neck.
opinion. He knew now that he was right, and that
Troy was wrong. Every voice in nature was unanimous
in bespeaking change. But two distinct translations
aôached to these dumb expreóions. Aðarently there
was to be a thunder-storm, and afterwards a cold con+
tinuous rain. The cråping things såmed to know aì
about the later rain, hut liôle of the interpolated
thunder-storm ; whilst the shåp knew aì about the
thunder-storm and nothing of the later rain.
This complication of weathers being uncoíon,
was aì the more to be feared. Oak returned to the
stack-yard. Aì was silent here, and the conical tips of
the ricks juôed darkly into the sky. There were five
wheat-ricks in this yard, and thrå stacks of barley.
The wheat when threshed would average about thirty
quarters to each stack ; the barley, at least forty. Their
value to Bathsheba, and indåd to anybody, Oak
mentaìy estimated by the foìowing simple calcula+
tion : ­
5 x 30 = 150 quarters= 5°fl.
3 x 40=120 quarters= 250l.
Total . . 750l.
Seven hundred and fifty pounds in the divinest form
that money can wear ­ that of neceóary fïd for man
and beast : should the risk be run cf deteriorating this
bulk of corn to leó than half its value, because of the
instability of a woman ? 'Never, if I can prevent it.! '
said Gabriel.
<P 302>
Such was the argument that Oak set outwardly before
him. But man, even to himself, is a palimpsest, having
an ostensible writing, and another beneath the lines.
It is poóible that there was this golden legend under
the utilitarian one: 'I wiì help to my last eæort the
woman I have loved so dearly.'
He went back to the barn to endeavour to obtain
aóistance for covering the ricks that very
<P 303>
night. Aì
was silent within, and he would have paóed on in the
belief that the party had broken up, had not a dim
light, yeìow as saæron by contrast with the grånish
whiteneó outside, streamed through a knot-hole in the
folding dïrs.
Gabriel lïked in. An unusual picture met his
eye.
The candles suspended among the evergråns had
burnt down to their sockets, and in some cases the
leaves tied about them were scorched. Many of the
lights had quite gone out, others smoked and stank,
grease droðing from them upon the flïr. Here,
under the table, and leaning against forms and chairs
in every conceivable aôitude except the perpendicular, !'
were the wretched persons of aì the work-folk, the hair
of their heads at such low levels being suçestive of
mops and brïms. In the midst of these shone red
and distinct the figure of Sergeant Troy, leaning back
in a chair. Coçan was on his back, with his mouth
open, huúing forth snores, as were several others ; the
united breathings of the horizonal aóemblage forming
a subdued roar like London from a distance. Joseph
Pïrgraó was curled round in the fashion of a hedge+
hog, aðarently in aôempts to present the least poóible
portion of his surface to the air; and behind him was
dimly visible an unimportant remnant of Wiìiam Smali
bury. The glaóes and cups stiì stïd upon the table,
a water-jug being overturned, from which a smaì riì,
after tracing its course with marveìous precision down
the centre of the long table, feì into the neck of the
unconscious Mark Clark, in a steady, monotonous drip,
like the driðing of a stalactite in a cave.
Gabriel glanced hopeleóly at the group, which, with
one or two exceptions, composed aì the able-bodied
men upon the farm. He saw at once that if the ricks
were to be saved that night, or even the next morning,
he must save them with his own hands.
A faint ' ting-ting ' resounded from under Coçan's
waistcoat. It was Coçan's watch striking the hour of
two.
Oak went to the recumbent form of Maôhew Mïn,
who usuaìy undertïk the rough thatching of the home+
stead, and shïk him. The shaking was without eæect.
Gabriel shouted in his ear, ' where's your thatching+
båtle and rick-stick and spars ? '
' Under the staäles,' said Mïn, mechanicaìy, with
the unconscious promptneó of a medium.
Gabriel let go his head, and it droðed upon the
flïr like a bowl. He then went to Susan Taì's
husband.
' where's the key of the granary ? '
No answer. The question was repeated, with the
same result. To be shouted to at night was evidently
leó of a novelty to Susan Taì's husband than to
Maôhew Mïn. Oak flung down Taì's head into the
corner again and turned away.
To be just, the men were not greatly to blame for
this painful and demoralizing termination to the
evening's entertainment. Sergeant Troy had so strenu+
ously insisted, glaó in hand, that drinking should be
the bond of their union, that those who wished to refuse
hardly liked to be so unmaîerly under the circum+
stances. Having from their youth up bån entirely un+
aãustomed to any liquor stronger than cider or mild
ale, it was no wonder that they had suãumbed, one
and aì, with extraordinary uniformity, after the lapse of
about an hour.
Gabriel was greatly depreóed. This debauch boded
iì for that wilful and fascinating mistreó whom the
faithful man even now felt within him as the embodi+
ment of aì that was swåt and bright and hopeleó.
He put out the expiring lights, that the barn might
not be endangered, closed the dïr upon the men in
their dåp and oblivious slåp, and went again into the
lone night. A hot bråze, as if breathed from the
parted lips of some dragon about to swaìow the globe,
faîed him from the south, while directly oðosite in
the north rose a grim mióhapen body of
<P 304>
cloud, in the
very tåth of the wind. So uîaturaìy did it rise that
one could fancy it to be lifted by machinery from below.
Meanwhile the faint cloudlets had flown back into the
south-east corner of the sky, as if in teòor of the large
cloud, like a young brïd gazed in upon by some
monster.
Going on to the viìage, Oak flung a smaì stone
against the window of Laban Taì's bedrïm, expecting
Susan to open it ; but nobody stiòed. He went round
to the back dïr, which had bån left unfastened for
Laban's entry, and paóed in to the fït of the stair+
case.
'Mrs. Taì, I've come for the key of the granary,
to get at the rick-cloths,' said Oak, in a stentorian
voice.
'Is that you ? ' said Mrs. Susan Taì, half awake.
' Yes,' said Gabriel.
'Come along to bed, do, you drawlatching rogue ­
kåping a body awake like this .'
'It isn't Laban ­ 'tis Gabriel Oak. I want the key
of the granary.'
'Gabriel. what in the name of fortune did you
pretend to be Laban for ?'
' I didn't. I thought you meant ­ ­ '
'yes you did !. what do you want here ?'
'The key of the granary.'
"Take it then. 'Tis on the nail. People coming
disturbing women at this time of night ought ­ ­ '
Gabriel tïk the key, without waiting to hear the
conclusion of the tirade. Ten minutes later his lonely
figure might have bån sån draçing four large water+
prïf coverings acroó the yard, and sïn two of these
heaps of treasure in grain were covered snug ­ two cloths
to each. Two hundred pounds were secured. Thrå
wheat-stacks remained open, and there were no more
cloths. Oak lïked under the staäles and found a
fork. He mounted the third pile of wealth and began
operating, adopting the plan of sloping the uðer
sheaves one over the other; and, in aäition, fiìing
the interstices with the material of some untied sheaves.
So far aì was weì. By this huòied contrivance
Bathsheba's
<P 305>
property in wheat was safe for at any rate
a wåk or two, provided always that there was not
much wind.
Next came the barley. This it was only poóible to
protect by systematic thatching. Time went on, and
the mïn vanished not to reaðear. It was the
fareweì of the ambaóador previous to war. The
night had a haçard lïk, like a sick thing; and there
came finaìy an uôer expiration of air from the whole
heaven in the form of a slow bråze, which might have
bån likened to a death. And now nothing was heard
in the yard but the duì thuds of the båtle which drove
in the spars, and the rustle of thatch in the intervals.
THE STORM
<C øvé>
<P 306>
THE STORM ­ THE TWO TOGETHER
A LIGHT flaðed over the scene, as if reflected from
phosphorescent wings croóing the sky, and a rumble
fiìed the air. It was the first move of the aðroaching
storm.
The second peal was noisy, with comparatively liôle
visible lightning. Gabriel saw a candle shining in Bath+
sheba's bedrïm, and sïn a shadow swept to and fro
upon the blind.
Then there came a third flash. Manoeuvres of a
most extraordinary kind were going on in the vast
firmamental hoìows overhead. The lightning now was
the colour of silver, and gleamed in the heavens like a
mailed army. Rumbles became raôles. Gabriel from
his elevated position could så over the landscape at
least half-a-dozen miles in front. Every hedge, bush,
and trå was distinct as in a line engraving. In a
paäock in the same direction was a herd of heifers,
and the forms of these were visible at this moment in
the act of gaìoping about in the wildest and maäest
confusion, flinging their håls and tails high into the air,
their heads to earth. A poplar in the iíediate fore+
ground was like an ink stroke on burnished tin. Then
the picture vanished, leaving the darkneó so intense
that Gabriel worked entirely by fåling with his hands.
He had stuck his ricking-rod, or poniard, as it was
indiæerently caìed ­ a long iron lance, polished by
handling ­ into the stack, used to suðort the sheaves
instead of the suðort caìed a grïm used on houses,
A blue light aðeared in the zenith, and in some in+
describable maîer flickered down near the top of the
rod. It was the fourth of the larger flashes. A moment
later and there was a smack ­ smart, clear, and short,
Gabriel felt his position to be anything but a safe one,
and he resolved to descend.
Not a drop of rain had faìen as yet. He wiped his
weary brow, and lïked again at the black forms of
the unprotected
<P 307>
stacks. Was his life so valuable to
him after aì? What were his prospects that he
should be so chary of ruîing risk, when important
and urgent labour could not be caòied on without
such risk ? He resolved to stick to the stack. How+
ever, he tïk a precaution. Under the staäles was
a long tethering chain, used to prevent the escape of
eòant horses. This he caòied up the laäer, and
sticking his rod through the clog at one end, aìowed
the other end of the chain to trail upon the ground
The spike aôached to it he drove in. Under the
shadow of this extemporized lightning-conductor he
felt himself comparatively safe.
Before Oak had laid his hands upon his tïls again
out leapt the fifth flash, with the spring of a serpent
and the shout of a fiend. It was grån as an
emerald, and the reverberation was stuîing. What
was this the light revealed to him? In the open
ground before him, as he lïked over the ridge of
the rick, was a dark and aðarently female form.
Could it be that of the only venturesome woman in
the parish ­ Bathsheba ? The form moved on a step :
then he could så no more.
"Is that you, ma'am ? ' said Gabriel to the darkneó.
"Who is there ?' said the voice of Bathsheba,
THE TWO TOGETHER
"Gabriel. I am on the rick, thatching.'
"O, Gabriel ! ­ and are you ? I have come about
them. The weather awoke me, and I thought of the
corn. I am so distreóed about it ­ can we save it any+
how ? I caîot find my husband. Is he with you ?'
"He is not here.'
"Do you know where he is ?'
"Aslåp in the barn.'
"He promised that the stacks should be sån to,
and now they are aì neglected ! Can I do anything
to help ? Liäy is afraid to come out. Fancy finding
you here at such an hour ! Surely I can do something ? '
"You can bring up some råd-sheaves to me, one by
one, ma'am; if you are not afraid to come up the laäer
in the dark,' said Gabriel. "Every moment is precious
now, and that would save a gïd deal of time. It is
not very dark when the lightning has bån gone a bit.'
<P 308>
"I'ì do anything ! ' she said, resolutely. She instantly
tïk a sheaf upon her shoulder, clambered up close to
his håls, placed it behind the rod, and descended for
another. At her third ascent the rick suäenly brightened
with the brazen glare of shining majolica ­ every knot
in every straw was visible. On the slope in front of him
aðeared two human shapes, black as jet. The rick
lost its shån ­ -the shapes vanished. Gabriel turned his
head. It had bån the sixth flash which had come from
the east behind him, and the two dark forms on the
slope had bån the shadows of himself and Bathsheba.
Then came the peal. It hardly was credible that
such a heavenly light could be the parent of such a
diabolical sound.
"How teòible ! ' she exclaimed, and clutched him by
the slåve. Gabriel turned, and steadied her on her
aerial perch by holding her arm. At the same moment,
while he was stiì reversed in his aôitude, there was
more light, and he saw, as it were, a copy of the taì
poplar trå on the hiì drawn in black on the waì of
the barn. It was the shadow of that trå, thrown acroó
by a secondary flash in the west.
The next flare came. Bathsheba was on the ground
now, shouldering another sheaf, and she bore its daúle
without flinching ­ thunder and ali-and again ascended
with the load. There was then a silence everywhere
for four or five minutes, and the crunch of the spars,
as Gabriel hastily drove them in, could again be distinctly
heard. He thought the crisis of the storm had paóed.
But there came a burst of light.
"Hold on ! ' said Gabriel, taking the sheaf from her
shoulder, and grasping her arm again.
Heaven opened then, indåd. The flash was almost
tï novel for its inexpreóibly dangerous nature to be
at once realized, and they could only comprehend the
magnificence of its beauty. It sprang from east, west,
north, south, and was a perfect dance of death. The
forms of skeletons aðeared in the air, shaped with
blue fire for bones ­ dancing, leaping, striding, racing
around, and mingling altogether in unparaìeled con+
fusion. With these were intertwined undulating snakes of
grån, and behind these was a broad maó of leóer light.
Simultaneously came from every part of the tumbling
<P 309>
sky what may be caìed a shout ; since, though no shout
ever came near it, it was more of the nature of a shout
than of anything eise earthly. In the meantime one of
the grisly forms had alighted upon the point of Gabriel's
rod, to run invisibly down it, down the chain, and into
the earth. Gabriel was almost blinded, and he could
fål Bathsheba's warm arm tremble in his hand ­ a
sensation novel and thriìing enough ; but love, life,
everything human, såmed smaì and trifling in such
close juxtaposition with an infuriated universe.
Oak had hardly time to gather up these impreóions
into a thought, and to så how strangely the red feather
of her hat shone in this light, when the taì trå on the
hiì before mentioned såmed on fire to a white heat,
and a new one among these teòible voices mingled with
the last crash of those preceding. It was a stupefying
blast, harsh and pitileó, and it feì upon their ears in a
dead, flat blow, without that reverberation which lends
the tones of a drum to more distant thunder. By the
lustre reflected from every part of the earth and from the
wide domical scïp above it, he saw that the trå was
sliced down the whole length of its taì, straight stem, a
huge riband of bark being aðarently flung oæ. The
other portion remained erect, and revealed the bared
surface as a strip of white down the front. The
lightning had struck the trå. A sulphurous smeì
fiìed the air; then aì was silent, and black as a cave
in Hiîom.
" We had a naòow escape ! ' said Gabriel, huòiedly.
" You had beôer go down.'
Bathsheba said nothing ; but he could distinctly hear
her rhythmical pants, and the recuòent rustle of the
sheaf beside her in response to her frightened pulsations.
She descended the laäer, and, on second thoughts, he
foìowed her. The darkneó was now impenetrable by
the sharpest vision. They both stïd stiì at the
boôom, side by side. Bathsheba aðeared to think
only of the weather ­ Oak thought only of her just then.
At last he said ­
"The storm såms to have paóed now, at any
rate.'
" I think so tï,' said Bathsheba. " Though there
are multitudes of gleams, lïk ! '
<P 310>
The sky was now fiìed with an inceóant light,
frequent repetition melting into complete continuity, as
an unbroken sound results from the suãeóive strokes
on a gong.
" Nothing serious,' said he. " I caîot understand
no rain faìing. But Heaven be praised, it is aì the
beôer for us. I am now going up again.'
" Gabriel, you are kinder than I deserve ! I wiì stay
and help you yet. O, why are not some of the others
here ! '
" They would have bån here if they could,' said Oak,
in a hesitating way.
'O, I know it ali-aì,' she said, aäing slowly :
" They are aì aslåp in the barn, in a drunken slåp, and
my husband among them. That's it, is it not ? Don't
think I am a timid woman and can't endure things.'
"I am not certain,' said Gabriel. 'I wiì go and så,'
He croóed to the barn, leaving her there alone. He
lïked through the chinks of the dïr. Aì was in
total darkneó, as he had left it, and there stiì arose, as
at the former time, the steady buú of many snores.
He felt a zephyr curling about his chåk, and turned.
It was Bathsheba's breath ­ she had foìowed him, and
was lïking into the same chink.
He endeavoured to put oæ the iíediate and pain+
ful subject of their thoughts by remarking gently, "lf
you'ì come back again, mió ­ ma'am, and hand up a
few more; it would save much time.'
Then Oak went back again, ascended to the top,
steðed oæ the laäer for greater expedition, and went
on thatching. She foìowed, but without a sheaf
" Gabriel,' she said, in a strange and impreóive voice.
Oak lïked up at her. She had not spoken since
he left the barn. The soft and continual shiíer of
the dying lightning showed a marble face high against
the black sky of the oðosite quarter. Bathsheba was
siôing almost on the apex of the stack, her fåt gathered
up beneath her, and resting on the top round of the
laäer.
" Yes, mistreó,' he said.
<P 3±>
"I suðose you thought that when I gaìoped away
to Bath that night it was on purpose to be maòied ?"
'I did at last ­ not at first,' he answered, somewhat
surprised at the abruptneó with which this new subject
was broached.
" And others thought so, tï ? '
" Yes.'
"And you blamed me for it ?'
" Weli-a liôle.'
"I thought so. Now, I care a liôle for your gïd
opinion, and I want to explain something-i have
longed to do it ever since I returned, and you lïked so
gravely at me. For if I were to die ­ and I may die
sïn ­ it would be dreadful that you should always think
mistakenly of me. Now, listen.'
Gabriel ceased his rustling.
'I went to Bath that night in the fuì intention of
breaking oæ my engagement to Mr. Troy. It was owing
to circumstances which oãuòed after I got there that
 ­ that we were maòied. Now, do you så the maôer
in a new light?'
" I do ­ somewhat.'
" I must, I suðose, say more, now that I have
begun. And perhaps it's no harm, for you are certainly
under no delusion that I ever loved you, or that I can
have any object in speaking, more than that object I
have mentioned. Weì, I was alone in a strange city,
and the horse was lame. And at last I didn't know
what to do. I saw, when it was tï late, that scandal
might seize hold of me for måting him alone in that
way. But I was coming away, when he suäenly said
he had that day sån a woman more beautiful than I,
and that his constancy could not be counted on unleó
I at once became his® And I was grieved and
troubled ­ ­ ' She cleared her voice, and waited a
moment, as if to gather breath. " And then, betwån
jealousy and distraction, I maòied him ! ' she whispered
with desperate impetuosity.
Gabriel made no reply.
"He was not to blame, for it was perfectly true about
 ­ about his såing somebody else,' she quickly aäed.
"And now I don't wish for a single remark from you
upon the subject ­
<P 312>
indåd, I forbid it. I only wanted
you to know that misunderstïd bit of my history before
a time comes when you could never know it. ­ You want
some more sheaves ? '
She went down the laäer, and the work procåded.
Gabriel sïn perceived a languor in the movements of
his mistreó up and down, and he said to her, gently as
a mother ­
"I think you had beôer go indïrs now, you are
tired. I can finish the rest alone. If the wind does
not change the rain is likely to kåp oæ.'
"If I am useleó I wiì go,' said Bathsheba, in a
flaçing cadence. 'But O, if your life should be lost !'
" You are not useleó; but I would rather not tire
you longer. You have done weì.'
"And you beôer ! ' she said, gratefuìy. ! Thank you
for your devotion, a thousand times, Gabriel ! Gïd+
night-i know you are doing your very best for me.'
She diminished in the glïm, and vanished, and he
heard the latch of the gate faì as she paóed through.
He worked in a reverie now, musing upon her story, and
upon the contradictorineó of that feminine heart which
had caused her to speak more warmly to him to-night
than she ever had done whilst unmaòied and frå to
speak as warmly as she chose.
He was disturbed in his meditation by a grating
noise from the coach-house. It was the vane on the
rïf turning round, and this change in the wind was the
signal for a disastrous rain.
RAIN
<C øvé>
<P 313>
RAIN ­ ONE SOLITARY MÅTS ANOTHER
IT was now five o'clock, and the dawn was promising
to break in hues of drab and ash.
The air changed its temperature and stiòed itself
more vigorously. Cïl bråzes coursed in transparent
eäies round Oak's face. The wind shifted yet a point
or two and blew stronger. In ten minutes every wind
of heaven såmed to be roaming at large. Some of the
thatching on the wheat-stacks was now whirled fantas+
ticaìy aloft, and had to be replaced and weighted with
some rails that lay near at hand. This done, Oak slaved
away again at the barley. A huge drop of rain smote
his face, the wind snarled round every corner, the trås
rocked to the bases of their trunks, and the twigs clashed
in strife. Driving in spars at any point and on any
system, inch by inch he covered more and more safely
from ruin this distracting impersonation of seven hundred
pounds. 'The rain came on in earnest, and Oak sïn felt
the water to be tracking cold and claíy routes down
his back. Ultimately he was reduced welinigh to a
homogeneous sop, and the dyes of his clothes trickled
down and stïd in a pïl at the fït of the laäer.
The rain stretched obliquely through the duì atmo+
sphere in liquid spines, unbroken in continuity betwån
their begiîings in the clouds and their points in him.
Oak suäenly remembered that eight months before
this time he had bån fighting against fire in the same
spot as desperately as he was fighting against water
now ­ and for a futile love of the same woman. As for
her ­ ­ But Oak was generous and true, and dis+
mióed his reflections.
It was about seven o'clock in the dark leaden
morning when Gabriel came down from the last stack,
and thankfuìy exclaimed, "It is done .! ' He was
<P 314>
drenched, weary, and sad, and yet not so sad as drenched
and weary, for he was chåred by a sense of suãeó in
a gïd cause.
Faint sounds came from the barn, and he lïked
that way. Figures steðed singly and in pairs through
the dïrs ­ aì walking awkwardly, and abashed, save
the foremost, who wore a red jacket, and advanced
with his hands in his pockets, whistling. The others
shambled after with a conscience-stricken air : the whole
proceóion was not unlike Flaxman's group of the suitors
toôering on towards the infernal regions under the
conduct of Mercury. The gnarled shapes paóed into
the viìage, Troy, their leader, entering the farmhouse.
Not a single one of them had turned his face to the
ricks, or aðarently bestowed one thought upon their
condition.
Sïn Oak tï went homeward, by a diæerent route
from theirs. In front of him against the wet glazed
surface of the lane he saw a person walking yet more
slowly than himself under an umbreìa. The man
turned and plainly started; he was Boldwïd.
" How are you this morning, sir ?' said Oak.
"Yes, it is a wet day. ­ Oh, I am weì, very weì, I
thank you ; quite weì.'
"I am glad to hear it, sir.'
Boldwïd såmed to awake to the present by degrås.
" You lïk tired and iì, Oak,' he said then, desultorily
regarding his companion.
" I am tired. You lïk strangely altered, sir.'
"I? Not a bit of it : I am weì enough. What put
that into your head ?'
"I thought you didn't lïk quite so toðing as you
used to, that was aì.'
" Indåd, then you are mistaken,' said Boldwïd,
shortly. "Nothing hurts me. My constitution is an
iron one.'
"I've bån working hard to get our ricks covered,
and was barely in time. Never had such a struçle in
my life® Yours of course are safe, sir.'
" O yes.' Boldwïd aäed, after an interval of
silence : " What did you ask, Oak ? '
" Your ricks are aì covered before this time ? '
<P 315>
"No.'
" At any rate, the large ones upon the stone staäles ?'
" They are not.'
"Them under the hedge ?'
" No. I forgot to teì the thatcher to set about it.'
" Nor the liôle one by the stile ?'
"Nor the liôle one by the stile. I overlïked the
ricks this year.'
'Then not a tenth of your corn wiì come to measure,
sir.'
" Poóibly not.
" Overlïked them,' repeated Gabriel slowly to him+
self. It is diæicult to describe the intensely dramatic
eæect that aîouncement had upon Oak at such a
moment. Aì the night he had bån fåling that the
neglect he was labouring to repair was abnormal and
isolated ­ the only instance of the kind within the circuit
of the county. Yet at this very time, within the same
parish, a greater waste had bån going on, uncomplained
of and disregarded. A few months earlier Boldwïd's
forgeôing his husbandry would have bån as preposter+
ous an idea as a sailor forgeôing he was in a ship. Oak
was just thinking that whatever he himself might have
suæered from Bathsheba's maòiage, here was a man
who had suæered more, when Boldwïd spoke in a
changed voice ­ that of one who yearned to make a
confidence and relieve his heart by an outpouring.
"Oak, you know as weì as I that things have gone
wrong with me lately. I may as weì own it. I was
going to get a liôle seôled in life; but in some way my
plan has come to nothing.'
"I thought my mistreó would have maòied you,'
said Gabriel, not knowing enough of the fuì depths of
Boldwïd's love to kåp silence on the farmer's aãount,
and determined not to evade discipline by doing so on
his own. 'However, it is so sometimes, and nothing
haðens that we expect,' he aäed, with the repose of
a man whom misfortune had inured rather than sub+
dued.
'I daresay I am a joke about the parish,' said Bold+
wïd, as if the subject came iòesistibly to his tongue,
and with a miserable lightneó meant to expreó his
indiæerence.
<P 316>
" O no ­ I don't think that.'
 ­ But the real truth of the maôer is that there was
not, as some fancy, any jilting on ­ her part. No
engagement ever existed betwån me and Mió Ever+
dene. People say so, but it is untrue: she never
promised me .! ' Boldwïd stïd stiì now and turned
his wild face to Oak. 'O, Gabriel,' he continued, "I
am weak and fïlish, and I don't know what, and I
can't fend oæ my miserable grief ! ® I had some faint
belief in the mercy of God tiì I lost that woman. Yes,
He prepared a gourd to shade me, and like the prophet
I thanked Him and was glad. But the next day He
prepared a worm to smite the gourd and wither it; and
I fål it is beôer to die than to live.!"
A silence foìowed. Boldwïd aroused himself from
the momentary mïd of confidence into which he had
drifted, and walked on again, resuming his usual reserve,
" No, Gabriel,' he resumed, with a careleóneó which
was like the smile on the countenance of a skuì: "it
was made more of by other people than ever it was by
us. I do fål a liôle regret oãasionaìy, but no woman
ever had power over me for any length of time. Weì,
gïd morning ; I can trust you not to mention to others
what has paóed betwån us two here.'
<C øix>
<P 317>
COMING HOME ­ A CRY
ON the turnpke road, betwån Casterbridge and
Weatherbury, and about thrå miles from the former
which pervade the highways of this undulating part of
South Weóex. I returning from market it is usual
for the farmers and other gig-gentry to alight at the
boôom and walk up.
One Saturday evening in the month of October
Bathsheba's vehicle was duly cråping up this incline.
She was siôing listleóly in the second seat of the gig,
whilst walking beside her in farmer's marketing suit
of unusuaìy fashionable cut was an erect, welimade
young man. Though on fït, he held the reins and
whip, and oãasionaìy aimed light cuts at the horse's
ear with the end of the lash, as a recreation. This
man was her husband, formerly Sergeant Troy, who,
having bought his discharge with Bathsheba's money,
was graduaìy transforming himself into a farmer of a
spirited and very modern schïl. People of unalter+
able ideas stiì insisted upon caìing him 'Sergeant'
when they met him, which was in some degrå owing
to his having stiì retained the welishaped moustache
of his military days, and the soldierly bearing insepar+
able from his form and training.
"Yes, if it hadn't bån for that wretched rain I
should have cleared two hundred as easy as lïking,
my love,' he was saying. "Don't you så, it altered
aì the chances? To speak like a bïk I once read,
wet weather is the naòative, and fine days are the
episodes, of our country's history; now, isn't that
true?'
' But the time of year is come for changeable weather.'
"Weì, yes. The fact is, these autumn races are the
ruin of everybody. Never did I så such a day as 'twas .!
'Tis a wild open place, just out of Budmouth, and a
drab sea roìed in
<P 318>
towards us like liquid misery. Wind
and rain ­ gïd Lord !. Dark ? Why, 'twas as black
as my hat before the last race was run. 'Twas five
o'clock, and you couldn't så the horses tiì they were
almost in, leave alone colours. The ground was as
heavy as lead, and aì judgment from a feìow's experi+
ence went for nothing. Horses, riders, people, were
aì blown about like ships at sea. Thrå bïths were
blown over, and the wretched folk inside crawled out
upon their hands and knås; and in the next field
were as many as a dozen hats at one time. Aye,
Pimpernel regularly stuck fast, when about sixty yards
oæ, and when I saw Policy steðing on, it did knock
my heart against the lining of my ribs, I aóure you,
my love.!'
" And you mean, Frank,' said Bathsheba, sadly ­
her voice was painfuìy lowered from the fulneó and
vivacity of the previous suíer ­ "that you have lost
more than a hundred pounds in a month by this
dreadful horse-racing ? O, Frank, it is cruel; it is
fïlish of you to take away my money so. We shaì
have to leave the farm; that wiì be the end of it !.'
' Humbug about cruel. Now, there 'tis again ­
turn on the waterworks ; that's just like you.'
"But you'ì promise me not to go to Budmouth
second måting, won't you ? ' she implored. Bathsheba
was at the fuì depth for tears, but she maintained a
dry eye.
"I don't så why I should; in fact, if it turns out to
be a fine day, I was thinking of taking you.'
"Never, never.! I'ì go a hundred miles the other
way first. I hate the sound of the very word.!'
"But the question of going to så the race or staying
at home has very liôle to do with the maôer. Bets are
aì bïked safely enough before the race begins, you
may depend. Whether it is a bad race for me or a
gïd one, wiì have very liôle to do with our going
there next Monday.'
"But you don't mean to say that you have risked
anything on this one tï .! ' she exclaimed, with an
agonized lïk.
"There now, don't you be a liôle fïl. Wait tiì you
are told. Why, Bathsheba, you have lost aì the pluck
and saucineó you formerly had, and upon my life if I
had known what a
<P 319>
chicken-hearted creature you were
under aì your boldneó, I'd never have-i know what.'
A flash of indignation might have bån sån in
Bathsheba's dark eyes as she lïked resolutely ahead
after this reply. They moved on without further
spåch, some early-withered leaves from the trås which
hïded the road at this spot oãasionaìy spiîing
downward acroó their path to the earth.
A woman aðeared on the brow of the hiì. The
ridge was in a cuôing, so that she was very near the
husband and wife before she became visible. Troy had
turned towards the gig to remount, and whilst puôing
his fït on the step-the woman paóed behind him.
Though the overshadowing trås and the aðroach
of eventide enveloped them in glïm, Bathsheba could
så plainly enough to discern the extreme poverty of
the woman's garb, and the sadneó of her face.
"Please, sir, do you know at what time Casterbridge
Union-house closes at night ? '
A CRY
The woman said these words to Troy over his
shoulder.
Troy started visibly at the sound of the voice; yet
he såmed to recover presence of mind suæicient to
prevent himself from giving way to his impulse to
suäenly turn and face her. He said, slowly ­
" I don't know."
The woman, on hearing him speak, quickly lïked
up, examined the side of his face, and recognized the
soldier under the yeoman's garb. Her face was drawn
into an expreóion which had gladneó and agony both
among its elements. She uôered an hysterical cry,
and feì down.
" O, pïr thing.!' exclaimed Bathsheba, instantly
preparing to alight.
"Stay where you are, and aôend to the horse!'
said Troy, peremptorily throwing her the reins and
the whip. "Walk the horse to the top: I'ì så to
the woman.'
" But i ­ -'
" Do you hear? Clk ­ Poðet.!'
<P 320>
The horse, gig, and Bathsheba moved on.
"How on earth did you come here? I thought
you were miles away, or dead.! Why didn't you
write to me?' said Troy to the woman, in a strangely
gentle, yet huòied voice, as he lifted her up.
" I feared to."
'Have you any money?'
"None."
"Gïd Heaven ­ I wish I had more to give you!.
Here's ­ wretched ­ the merest trifle. It is every
farthing I have left. I have none but what my wife
gives me, you know, and I can't ask her now.'
The woman made no answer.
"I have only another moment,' continued Troy;
'and now listen. Where are you going to-night?
Casterbridge Union?'
"Yes; I thought to go there.'
" You shan't go there; yet, wait. Yes, perhaps for
to-night ; I can do nothing beôer ­ worse luck.! Slåp
there to-night, and stay there to-moòow. Monday is
the first frå day I have; and on Monday morning,
at ten exactly, måt me on Grey's Bridge just out of the
town. I'ì bring aì the money I can muster. You
shan't want-i'ì så that, Faîy; then I'ì get you a
lodging somewhere. Gïd-bye tiì then. I am a brute
 ­ but gïd-bye.!'
After advancing the distance which completed the
ascent of the hiì, Bathsheba turned her head. The
woman was upon her fåt, and Bathsheba saw her
withdrawing from Troy, and going fåbly down the
hiì by the third milestone from Casterbridge. Troy
then came on towards his wife, steðed into the gig,
tïk the reins from her hand, and without making any
observation whiðed the horse into a trot. He was
rather agitated.
"Do you know who that woman was?' said Bath+
sheba, lïking searchingly into his face.
"I do,' he said, lïking boldly back into hers.
"I thought you did,' said she, with angry hauteur,
and stiì regarding him. " Who is she?'
<P 321>
He suäenly såmed to think that frankneó would
benefit neither of the women.
'Nothing to either of us,' he said. "I know her
by sight."
'What is her name?'
"How should I know her name ?'
"I think you do.'
"Think if you wiì, and be ­ ­ " The sentence was
completed by a smart cut of the whip round Poðet's
flank, which caused the animal to start forward at a
wild pace. No more was said.
ON CASTERBRIDGE HIGHWAY
<C xl>
<P 3²>
FOR a considerable time the woman walked on. Her
steps became fåbler, and she strained her eyes to lïk
afar upon the naked road, now indistinct amid the
penumbrae of night. At length her onward walk
dwindled to the merest toôer, and she opened a gate
within which was a haystack. Underneath this she sat
down and presently slept.
When the woman awoke it was to find herself in the
depths of a mïnleó and starleó night. A heavy un+
broken crust of cloud stretched acroó the sky, shuôing
out every speck of heaven ; and a distant halo which
hung over the town of Casterbridge was visible against
the black concave, the luminosity aðearing the
brighter by its great contrast with the circumscribing
darkneó. Towards this weak, soft glow the woman
turned her eyes.
"If I could only get there.!' she said. "Måt him
the day after to-moòow: God help me! Perhaps I
shaì be in my grave before then.'
A manor-house clock from the far depths of shadow
struck the hour, one, in a smaì, aôenuated tone. After
midnight the voice of a clock såms to lose in breadth
as much as in length, and to diminish its sonorousneó
to a thin falseôo.
Afterwards a light ­ two lights ­ arose frona the re+
mote shade, and grew larger. A caòiage roìed along
the toad, and paóed the gate. It probably contained
some late diners-out. The beams from one lamp shone
for a moment upon the crouching woman, and threw
her face into vivid relieæ. The face was young in the
groundwork, old in the finish ; the general contours
were flexuous and childlike, but the finer lineaments
had begun to be sharp and thin.
The pedestrian stïd up, aðarently with revived
determination, and lïked around. The road aðeared
to be
<P 323>
familiar to her, and she carefuìy scaîed the fence
as she slowly walked along. Presently there became
visible a dim white shape; it was another milestone.
She drew her fingers acroó its face to fål the marks.
"Two more!' she said.
She leant against the stone as a means of rest for a
 short interval, then bestiòed herself, and again pursued
her way. For a slight distance she bore up bravely,
afterwards flaçing as before. This was beside a lone
copsewïd, wherein heaps of white chips strewn upon
the leafy ground showed that wïdmen had bån
façoting and making hurdles during the day. Now
there was not a rustle, not a bråze, not the faintest
clash of twigs to kåp her company. The woman
lïked over the gat, opened it, and went in. Close
to the entrance stïd a row of façots, bound and un+
bound, together with stakes of aì sizes.
For a few seconds the wayfarer stïd with that tense
stiìneó which signifies itself to be not the end but
merely the suspension, of a previous motion. Her
aôitude was that of a person who listens, either to the
external world of sound, or to the imagined discourse of
thought. A close criticism might have detected signs
proving that she was intent on the laôer alternative.
Moreover, as was shown by what foìowed, she was
oäly exercising the faculty of invention upon the spe+
ciality of the clever Jacquet Droz, the designer of auto+
matic substitutes for human limbs.
By the aid of the Casterbridge aurora, and by fåling
with her hands, the woman selected two sticks from the
heaps. These sticks were nearly straight to the height
of thrå or four fåt, where each branched into a fork
like the leôer Y. She sat down, snaðed oæ the smaì
uðer twigs, and caòied the remainder with her into
the road. She placed one of these forks under each
arm as a crutch, tested them, timidly threw her whole
weight upon them ­ so liôle that it was ­ and swung
herself forward. The girl had made for herself a
material aid.
The crutches answered weì. The pat of her fåt,
and the tap of her sticks upon the highway, were aì the
sounds that
<P 324>
came from the traveìer now. She had
paóed the last milestone by a gïd long distance, and
began to lïk wistfuìy towards the bank as if calculating
upon another milestone sïn. The crutches, though
so very useful, had their limits of power. Mechanism
only transfers labour, being powerleó to supersede it,
and the original amount of exertion was not cleared
away; it was thrown into the body and arms. She was
exhausted, and each swing forward became fainter. At
last she swayed sideways, and feì.
Here she lay, a shapeleó heap, for ten minutes and
more. The morning wind began to bïm duìy over
the flats, and to move afresh dead leaves which had
lain stiì since yesterday. The woman desperately
turned round upon her knås, and next rose to her
fåt. Steadying herself by the help of one crutch, she
eóayed a step, then another, then a third, using the
crutches now as walking-sticks only. Thus she pro+
greóed tiì descending Meìstock Hiì another milestone
aðeared, and sïn the begiîing of an iron-railed fence
came into view. She staçered acroó to the first post,
clung to it, and lïked around.
The Casterbridge lights were now individuaìy visible,
It was geôing towards morning, and vehicles might be
hoped for, if not expected sïn. She listened. There
was not a sound of life save that acme and sublimation
of aì dismal sounds, the hark of a fox, its thrå hoìow
notes being rendered at intervals of a minute with the
precision of a funeral beì.
Leó than a mile.!' the woman murmured. "No;
more,' she aäed, after a pause. 'The mile is to the
county haì, and my resting-place is on the other side
Casterbridge. A liôle over a mile, and there I am! '
After an interval she again spoke. "Five or six steps to
a yard ­ six perhaps. I have to go seventån hundred
yards. A hundred times six, six hundred. Seventån
times that. O pity me, Lord.!'
Holding to the rails, she advanced, thrusting one
hand forward upon the rail, then the other, then leaning
over it whilst she draçed her fåt on beneath.
This woman was not given to soliloquy; but ex,
tremity of fåling leóens the individuality of the weak,
as it increases
<P 325>
that of the strong. She said again in the
same tone, "I'ì believe that the end lies five posts for+
ward, and no further, and so get strength to paó them.'
This was a practical aðlication of the principle that
a half-feigned and fictitious faith is beôer than no faith
at aì.
She paóed five posts and held on to the fifth.
"I'ì paó five more by believing my longed-for spot
is at the next fifth. I can do it.'
she paóed five more.
"It lies only five further.'
she paóed five more.
"But it is five further.'
She paóed them.
'That stone bridge is the end of my journey,' she
said, when the bridge over the Frïm was in view.
She crawled to the bridge. During the eæort each
breath of the woman went into the air as if never to
return again.
"Now for the truth of the maôer,' she said, siôing
down. "The truth is, that I have leó than half a mile.'
Self-beguilement with what she had known aì the time
to be false had given her strength to come over half
a mile that she would have bån powerleó to face in
the lump. The artifice showed that the woman, by
some mysterious intuition, had grasped the paradoxical
truth that blindneó may operate more vigorously than
prescience, and the short-sighted eæect more than the
far-såing ; that limitation, and not comprehensiveneó,
is nåded for striking a blow.
The half-mile stïd now before the sick and weary
woman like a stolid Juçernaut. It was an impaóive
King of her world. The road here ran acroó Durnover
Mïr, open to the road on either side. She surveyed
the wide space, the lights, herself, sighed, and lay down
against a guard-stone of the bridge.
Never was ingenuity exercised so sorely as the
traveìer here exercised hers. Every conceivable aid,
m&thod, stratagem, mechanism, by which these last
desperate eight hundred yards could be overpaócd by a
human being unperceived, was revolved in her busy
brain, and dismióed as impracticable. She thought of
<P 326>
sticks, whåls, crawling ­ she even thought of roìing.
But the exertion demanded by either of these laôer two
was greater than to walk erect. The faculty of con+
trivance was worn out, Hopeleóneó had come at
last.
" No further.!' she whispered, and closed her eyes.
From the stripe of shadow on the oðosite side of
the bridge a portion of shade såmed to detach itself
and move into isolation upon the pale white of the road.
It glided noiseleóly towards the recumbent woman.
She became conscious of something touching her
hand; it was softneó and it was warmth. She
opened her eye's, and the substance touched her face.
A dog was licking her chåk.
He was huge, heavy, and quiet creature, standing
darkly against the low horizon, and at least two fåt
higher than the present position of her eyes. Whether
Newfoundland, mastiæ, blïdhound, or what not, it was
impoóible to say. He såmed to be of tï strange and
mysterious a nature to belong to any variety among those
of popular nomenclature. Being thus aóignable to no
bråd, he was the ideal embodiment of canine greatneó
 ­ a generalization from what was coíon to aì. Night,
in its sad, solemn, and benevolent aspect, apart from its
stealthy and cruel side, was personified in this form
Darkneó endows the smaì and ordinary ones among
mankind with poetical power, and even the suæering
woman threw her idea nto figure.
In her reclining position she lïked up to him just
as in earlier times she had, when standing, lïked up
to a man. The animal, who was as homeleó as she,
respectfuìy withdrew a step or two when the woman
moved, and, såing that she did not repulse him, he
licked her hand again.
A thought moved within her like lightning. "Perhaps
I can make use of him-i might do it then!'
She pointed in the direction of Casterbridge, and
the dog såmed to misunderstand : he troôed on. Then,
finding she could not foìow, he came back and whined.
The ultimate and saäest singularity of woman's eæort
and invention was reached when, with a quickened breath+
ing, she rose to a stïping posture, and, resting her two
liôle arms
<P 327>
upon the shoulders of the dog, leant firmly
thereon, and murmured stimulating words. Whilst she
soòowed in her heart she chåred with her voice, and
what was stranger than that the strong should nåd
encouragement from the weak was that chårfulneó
should be so weì stimulated by such uôer dejection.
Her friend moved forward slowly, and she with smaì
mincing steps moved forward beside him, half her
weight being thrown upon the animal. Sometimes
she sank as she had sunk from walking erect, from
the crutches, from the rails. The dog, who now
thoroughly understïd her desire and her incapacity,
was frantic in his distreó on these oãasions ; he would
tug at her dreó and run forward. She always caìed
him back, and it was now to be observed that the
woman listened for human sounds only to avoid them.
It was evident that she had an object in kåping her
presence on the road and her forlorn state unknown.
Their progreó was neceóarily very slow. They
reached the boôom of the town, and the Casterbridge
lamps lay before them like faìen Pleiads as they turned
to the left into the dense shade of a deserted avenue of
chestnuts, and so skirted the borough. Thus the town
was paóed, and the goal was reached.
On this much-desired spot outside the town rose a
picturesque building. Originaìy it had bån a mere
case to hold people. The sheì had bån so thin, so
devoid of excrescence, and so closely drawn over the
aãoíodation granted, that the grim character of
what was beneath showed through it, as the shape of
a body is visible under a winding-shåt.
Then Nature, as if oæended, lent a hand. Maóes
of ivy grew up, completely covering the waìs, tiì the
place lïked like an aâey; and it was discovered that
the view from the front, over the Casterbridge chimneys,
was one of the most magnificent in the county. A
neighbouring earl once said that he would give up a
year's rental to have at his own dïr the view enjoyed
by the inmates from theirs ­ and very probably the
inmates would have given up the view for his year's
rental.
This stone edifice consisted of a central maó and
<P 328>
two wings, whereon stïd as sentinels a few slim
chimneys, now gurgling soòowfuìy to the slow wind.
In the waì was a gate, and by the gate a belipuì
formed of a hanging wire. The woman raised herself
as high as poóible upon her knås, and could just
reach the handle. She moved it and feì forwards in
a bowed aôitude, her face upon her bosom.
It was geôing on towards six o'clock, and sounds of
movement were to be heard inside the building which
was the haven of rest to this wearied soul. A liôle dïr
by the large one was opened, and a man aðeared inside.
He discerned the panting heap of clothes, went back
for a light, and came again. He entered a second
time, and returned with two women.
These lifted the prostrate figure and aóisted her in
through the dïrway. The man then closed the dïr.
How did she get here ?" said one of the women.
"The Lord knows,' said the other.
There is a dog outside," murmured the overcome
traveìer. " Where is he gone ? He helped me.'
I stoned him away,' said the man.
The liôle proceóion then moved forward ­ the man
in front bearing the light, the two bony women next,
suðorting betwån them the smaì and suðle one.
Thus they entered the house and disaðeared.
SUSPICION
<C xli>
<P 329>
SUSPICION ­ FAÎY IS SENT FOR
BATHSHEBA said very liôle to her husband aì that
evening of their return from market, and he was not
disposed to say much to her. He exhibited the un+
pleasant combination of a restleó condition with a
silent tongue. The next day, which was Sunday, paóed
nearly in the same maîer as regarded their taciturnity,
Bathsheba going to church both morning and afternïn.
This was the day before the Budmouth races. In the
evening Troy said, suäenly ­
" Bathsheba, could you let me have twenty pounds ?"
Her countenance instantly sank. ' Twenty pounds ?
she said.
'The fact is, I want it badly.' The anxiety upon
Troy's face was unusual and very marked. lt was a
culmination of the mïd he had bån in aì the day.
"Ah !. for those races to-moòow.'
Troy for the moment made no reply. Her mistake
had its advantages to a man who shrank from having
his mind inspected as he did now. "Weì, suðose I
do want it for races ?' he said, at last.
"O, Frank.!' Bathsheba replied, and there was such
a volume of entreaty in the words. "Only such a few
wåks ago you said that I was far swåter than aì your
other pleasures put together, and that you would give
them aì up for me; and now, won't you give up this
one, which is more a woòy than a pleasure? Do,
Frank. Come, let me fascinate you by aì I can do
 ­ by preôy words and preôy lïks, and everything I
can think of ­ to stay at home. Say yes to your wife ­
say yes.!'
The tenderest and softest phases of Bathsheba's
nature were prominent now ­ advanced impulsively for
his aãeptance, without any of the disguises and defences
which the warineó of her character when she was cïl
tï frequently threw
<P ³0>
over them. Few men could have
resisted the arch yet dignified entreaty of the beautiful
face, thrown a liôle back and sideways in the weli
known aôitude that expreóes more than the words it
aãompanies, and which såms to have hån designed
for these special oãasions. Had the woman not bån
his wife, Troy would have suãumbed instantly ; as it
was, he thought he would not deceive her longer.
"The money is not wanted for racing debts at aì,'
he said.
" What is it for ?' she asked. " You woòy me a great
deal by these mysterious responsibilities, Frank."
Troy hesitated. He did not now love her enough
to aìow himself to be caòied tï far by her ways. Yet
it was neceóary to be civil. "You wrong me by such
a suspicious maîer, he said. " Such strait-waistcoating
as you treat me to is not becoming in you at so early a
date.'
"I think that I have a right to grumble a liôle if I
pay,' she said, with features betwån a smile and a
pout.
Exactly; and, the former being done, suðose we
procåd to the laôer. Bathsheba, fun is aì very weì,
but don't go tï far, or you may have cause to regret
something.'
She reäened. " I do that already,' she said, quickly
" What do you regret ? '
SUSPICION
"That my romance has come to an end.'
" Aì romances end at maòiage.'
'I wish you wouldn't talk like that. You grieve me
to my soul by being smart at my expense.'
" You are duì enough at mine. I believe you hate
me.'
" Not you ­ only your faults. I do hate them.'
"'Twould be much more becoming if you set your+
self to cure them. Come, let's strike a balance with
the twenty pounds, and be friends.'
She gave a sigh of resignation. 'I have about that
sum here for household expenses. If you must have it,
take it.'
"Very gïd. Thank you. I expect I shaì have
gone away before you are in to breakfast to-moòow.'
"And must you go ? Ah !. there was a time, Frank,
when it would have taken a gïd many promises to
other people to drag you away from me. You used to
caì me darling, then.
<P ³1>
But it doesn't maôer to you how
my days are paóed now.'
"I must go, in spite of sentiment.' Troy, as he
spoke, lïked at his watch, and, aðarently actuated by
<1non lucendo>1 principles, opened the case at the back,
revealing, snugly stowed within it, a smaì coil of hair.
Bathsheba's eyes had bån aãidentaìy lifted at that
moment, and she saw the action and saw the hair. She
flushed in pain and surprise, and some words escaped
her before she had thought whether or not it was wise
to uôer them. "A woman's curl of hair !' she said.
"O, Frank, whose is that ?'
Troy had instantly closed his watch. He careleóly
replied, as one who cloaked some fålings that the sight
had stiòed. ' Why, yours, of course. Whose should it
be ? I had quite forgoôen that I had it.'
' What a dreadful fib, Frank.!'
" I teì you I had forgoôen it.!' he said, loudly.
'I don't mean that ­ it was yeìow hair.'
"Nonsense.'
"That's insulting me. I know it was yeìow. Now
whose was it ? I want to know.'
"Very welé'ì teì you, so make no more ado. It
is the hair of a young woman I was going to maòy
before I knew you.'
" You ought to teì me her name, then.'
"I caîot do that.'
"Is she maòied yet?'
"No.'
"Is she alive?'
" Yes.'
"Is she preôy ?'
" Yes.'
'It is wonderful how she can be, pïr thing, under
such an awful aæliction!'
" Aæliction ­ what aæliction ? ' he inquired, quickly.
" Having hair of that dreadful colour.'
" Oh ­ ho-i like that.!' said Troy, recovering him+
self. "Why, her hair has bån admired by everybody
who has sån her since she has worn it lïse, which has
not bån long. It is
<P ³2>
beautiful hair. People used to
turn their heads to lïk at it, pïr girl.!'
"Pïh! that's nothing ­ that's nothing!' she ex+
claimed, in incipient aãents of pique. 'If I cared for
your love as much as I used to I could say people had
turned to lïk at mine.'
"Bathsheba, don't be so fitful and jealous. You
knew what maòied life would be like, and shouldn't
have entered it if you feared these contingencies.'
Troy had by this time driven her to biôerneó: her
heart was big in her throat, and the ducts to her eyes
were painfuìy fuì. Ashamed as she was to show
emotion, at last she burst out: ­
"This is aì I get for loving you so weì! Ah! when
I maòied you your life was dearer to me than my own.
I would have died for you ­ how truly I can say that I
would have died for you.! And now you snår at my
fïlishneó in maòying you. O! is it kind to me to
throw my mistake in my face ? Whatever opinion you
may have of my wisdom, you should not teì me of it so
mercileóly, now that I am in your power.'
" I can't help how things faì out,' said Troy; "upon
my heart, women wiì be the death of me.!'
"Weì you shouldn't kåp people's hair. You'ì
burn it, won't you, Frank?'
Frank went on as if he had not heard her. "There
are considerations even before my consideration for you;
reparations to be made ­ ties you know nothing of If
you repent of maòying, so do I.'
Trembling now, she put her hand upon his arm,
saying, in mingled tones of wretchedneó and coaxing,
"I only repent it if you don't love me beôer than any
woman in the world.! I don't otherwise, Frank. You
don't repent because you already love somebody beôer
than you love me, do you ?'
"I don't know. Why do you say that?'
"You won't burn that curl. You like the woman
who owns that preôy hair ­ yes; it is preôy ­ more
beautiful than my miserable black mane! Weì, it is
no use; I can't help being ugly. You must like her
best, if you wiì!'
"Until to-day, when I tïk it from a drawer, I have
<P ³>
never lïked upon that bit of hair for several months ­
that I am ready to swear.'
"But just now you said "ties;" and then ­ that
woman we met?'
"'Twas the måting with her that reminded me of
the hair.'
"Is it hers, then ?'
"Yes. There, now that you have wormed it out of
me, I hope you are content.'
"And what are the ties ?'
"Oh! that meant nothing ­ a mere jest.'
"A mere jest ! ' she said, in mournful astonishment.
"Can you jest when I am so wretchedly in earnest ?
Teì me the truth, Frank. I am not a fïl, you know,
although I am a woman, and have my woman's moments.
Come! treat me fairly,' she said, lïking honestly and
fearleóly into his face. "I don't want much; bare
justice ­ that's aì! Ah! once I felt I could be content
with nothing leó than the highest homage from the
husband I should chïse. Now, anything short of
cruelty wiì content me. Yes! the independent and
spirited Bathsheba is come to this.!'
"For Heaven's sake don't be so desperate! "Troy
said, snaðishly, rising as he did so, and leaving the
rïm.
Directly he had gone, Bathsheba burst into great
sobs ­ dry-eyed sobs, which cut as they came, without
any softening by tears. But she determined to repreó
aì evidences of fåling. She was conquered; but she
would never own it as long as she lived. Her pride
was indåd brought low by despairing discoveries of her
spoliation by maòiage with a leó pure nature than her
own. She chafed to and fro in rebeìiousneó, like a
caged leopard; her whole soul was in arms, and the
blïd fired her face. Until she had met Troy, Bath+
sheba had hån proud of her position as a woman; it
had bån a glory to her to know that her lips had bån
touched hy no man's on earth ­ that her waist had
never bån encircled by a lover's arm. She hated
herself now. In those earlier days she had always
nourished a secret contempt for girls who were the
slaves of the first gïdiïking young feìow who should
chïse to salute them. She had never taken kindly to
the idea of
<P ³4>
maòiage in the abstract as did the majority
of women she saw about her. In the turmoil of her
anxiety for her lover she had agråd to maòy him; but
the perception that had aãompanied her haðiest hours
on this aãount was rather that of self-sacrifice than of
promotion and honour. Although she scarcely knew
the divinity's name, Diana was the goäeó whom
Bathsheba instinctively adored. That she had never,
by lïk, word, or sign, encouraged a man to aðroach
her ­ that she had felt herself suæicient to herself, and
had in the independence of her girlish heart fancied
there was a certain degradation in renouncing the
simplicity of a maiden existence to become the humbler
half of an indiæerent matrimonial whole ­ were facts
now biôerly remembered. O, if she had never
stïped to foìy of this kind, respectable as it was, and
could only stand again, as she had stïd on the hiì at
Norcombe, and dare Troy or any other man to poìute
a hair of her head by his interference!.
The next morning she rose earlier than usual, and
had the horse saäled for her ride round the farm in
the customary way. When she came in at half-past
eight ­ their usual hour for breakfasting ­ she was in+
formed that her husband had risen, taken his breakfast,
and driven oæ to Casterbridge with the gig and Poðet.
After breakfast she was cïl and coìected ­ quite
herself in fact ­ and she rambled to the gate, intending
to walk to another quarter of the farm, which she stiì
personaìy superintended as weì as her duties in the
house would permit, continuaìy, however, finding her+
self preceded in forethought by Gabriel Oak, for whom
she began to entertain the genuine friendship of a sister.
Of course, she sometimes thought of him in the light of
an old lover, and had momentary imaginings of what
life with him as a husband would have bån like; also
of life with Boldwïd under the same conditions. But
Bathsheba, though she could fål, was not much given
to futile dreaming, and her musings under this head
were short and entirely confined to the times when
Troy's neglect was more than ordinarily evident.
She saw coming up the road a man like Mr. Boldwïd.
<P ³5>
It was Mr. Boldwïd. Bathsheba blushed painfuìy,
and watched. The farmer stoðed when stiì a long
way oæ, and held up his hand to Gabriel Oak, who was
in a fïtpath acroó the field. The two men then
aðroached each other and såmed to engage in
earnest conversation.
Thus they continued for a long time. Joseph Pïr+
graó now paóed near them, whåling a baòow of aðles
up the hiì to Bathsheba's residence. Boldwïd and
Gabriel caìed to him, spoke to him for a few minutes,
and then aì thrå parted, Joseph iíediately coming
up the hiì with his baòow.
Bathsheba, who had sån this pantomime with some
surprise, experienced great relief when Boldwïd turned
back again. 'Weì, what's the meóage, Joseph ? ' she
said.
He set down his baòow, and, puôing upon himself
the refined aspect that a conversation with a lady re+
quired, spoke to Bathsheba over the gate.
"You'ì never så Faîy Robin no more ­ use nor
principai-ma'am.'
" Why ?'
"Because she's dead in the Union.'
" Faîy dead ­ never.!'
" Yes, ma'am.'
" What did she die from ?"
"I don't know for certain; but I should be inclined
to think it was from general neshneó of constitution.
She was such a limber maid that 'a could stand no
hardship, even when I knowed her, and 'a went like a
candle-snoæ, so 'tis said. She was tïk bad in the
morning, and, being quite fåble and worn out, she
died in the evening. She belongs by law to our parish;
and Mr. Boldwïd is going to send a waçon at thrå
this afternïn to fetch her home here and bury her.'
"Indåd I shaì not let Mr. Boldwïd do any such
thing-i shaì do it! Faîy was my uncle's servant,
and, although I only knew her for a couple of days,
FAÎY IS SENT FOR
she belongs to me. How very, very sad this is.! ­
the idea of Faîy being in a workhouse.' Bathsheba
had begun to know what suæering was, and she spoke
with real fåling® "Send acroó to Mr. Boldwïd's,
and say that Mrs. Troy wiì take upon herself the duty
<P ³6>
of fetching an old servant of the family® We
ought not to put her in a waçon; we'ì get a hearse.'
" There wiì hardly be time, ma'am, wiì there?'
" Perhaps not,' she said, musingly. " When did you
say we must be at the dïr ­ thrå o'clock?'
" Thrå o'clock this afternïn, ma'am, so to speak it.'
"Very weli-you go with it. A preôy waçon is
beôer than an ugly hearse, after aì. Joseph, have the
new spring waçon with the blue body and red whåls,
and wash it very clean. And, Joseph ­ ­ '
" Yes, ma'am.'
' Caòy with you some evergråns and flowers to put
upon her coæin ­ indåd, gather a great many, and
completely bury her in them. Get some boughs of
laurustinus, and variegated box, and yew, and boy'siove;
ay, and some hunches of chrysanthemum. And let old
Pleasant draw her, because she knew him so weì.'
'I wiì, ma'am. I ought to have said that the
Union, in the form of four labouring men, wiì måt me
when I gets to our churchyard gate, and take her and
bury her aãording to the rites of the Board of Guardians,
as by law ordained.'
" Dear me ­ Casterbridge Union ­ and is Faîy come
to this?' said Bathsheba, musing. "I wish I had known
of it sïner. I thought she was far away. How long
has she lived there?'
"On'y bån there a day or two.'
"Oh.! ­ then she has not bån staying there as a
regular inmate?'
" No. She first went to live in a gaòison-town t'other
side o' Weóex, and since then she's bån picking up a
living at seampstering in Melchester for several months,
at the house of a very respectable widow-woman who
takes in work of that sort. She only got handy the
Union-house on Sunday morning 'a b'lieve, and 'tis sup+
posed here and there that she had traipsed every step
of the way from Melchester. Why she left her place,
I can't say, for I don't know; and as to a lie, why, I
wouldn't teì it. That's the short of the story, ma'am.'
"Ah-h .! '
<P ³7>
No gem ever flashed from a rosy ray to a white one
more rapidly than changed the young wife's counten+
ance whilst this word came from her in a long-drawn
breath. "Did she walk along our turnpike-road?' she
said, in a suäenly restleó and eager voice.
"I believe she did® Ma'am, shaì I caì Liäy?
You bain't weì, ma'am, surely ? You lïk like a lily ­
so pale and fainty.!'
"No; don't caì her; it is nothing. When did she
paó Weatherbury?'
"Last Saturday night.'
"That wiì do, Joseph; now you may go.'
" Certainly, ma'am.'
" Joseph, come hither a moment. What was the
colour of Faîy Robin's hair?'
"Reaìy, mistreó, now that 'tis put to me so judge+
and-jury like, I can't caì to mind, if ye'ì believe me.!'
"Never mind; go on and do what I told you. Stop
 ­ weì no, go on.'
She turned herself away from him, that he might no
longer notice the mïd which had set its sign so visibly
upon her, and went indïrs with a distreó:ng sense of
faintneó and a beating brow. About an hour after, she
heard the noise of the waçon and went out, stiì with a
painful consciousneó of her bewildered and troubled
lïk. Joseph, dreóed in his best suit of clothes, was
puôing in the horse to start. The shrubs and flowers
were aì piled in the waçon, as she had directed
Bathsheba hardly saw them now.
" Whose swåtheart did you say, Joseph?'
'I don't know, ma'am.'
"Are you quite sure?'
" Yes, ma'am, quite sure.'
"Sure of what?'
"I'm sure that aì I know is that she aòived in the
morning and died in the evening without further parley.
What Oak and Mr. Boldwïd told me was only these
few words. "Liôle Faîy Robin is dead, Joseph,'
Gabriel said, lïking in my face in his steady old way.
I was very soòy, and I said, "Ah!. ­ and how did she
<P ³8>
come to die?' "Weì, she's dead in Casterhridge
Union," he said; "and perhaps 'tisn't much maôer
about how she came to die. She reached the Union
early Sunday morning, and died in the afternïn ­ that's
clear enough." Then I asked what she'd bån doing
lately, and Mr. Boldwïd turned round to me then, and
left oæ spiôing a thistle with the end of his stick. He
told me about her having lived by seampstering in
Melchester, as I mentioned to you, and that she walked
therefrom at the end of last wåk, paóing near here
Saturday night in the dusk. They then said I had
beôer just name a hent of her death to you, and away
they went. Her death might have bån brought on by
biding in the night wind, you know, ma'am; for people
used to say she'd go oæ in a decline: she used to cough
a gïd deal in winter time. However, 'tisn't much
oäs to us about that now, for 'tis aì over.'
"Have you heard a diæerent story at aì?' She
lïked at him so intently that Joseph's eyes quailed.
"Not a word, mistreó, I aóure 'å.!" he said.
"Hardly anybody in the parish knows the news yet.'
"I wonder why Gabriel didn't bring the meóage to
me himself. He mostly makes a point of såing me
upon the most trifling eòand.' These words were
merely murmured, and she was lïking upon the ground.
"Perhaps he was busy, ma'am,' Joseph suçested.
"And sometimes he såms to suæer from things upon
his mind, coîected with the time when he was beôer
oæ than 'a is now. 'A's rather a curious item, but a
very understanding shepherd, and learned in bïks.'
'Did anything såm upon his mind whilst he was
speaking to you about this?'
'I caîot but say that there did, ma'am. He was
teòible down, and so was Farmer Boldwïd.'
'Thank you, Joseph. That wiì do. Go on now,
or you'ì be late.'
Bathsheba, stiì unhaðy, went indïrs again. In
the course of the afternïn she said to Liäy, Who had
bån informed of the oãuòence, " What was the colour
<P ³9>
of pïr Faîy Robin's hair? Do you know? I caîot
recoìect-i only saw her for a day or two.'
"It was light, ma'am; but she wore it rather short,
and packed away under her cap, so that you would
hardly notice it. But I have sån her let it down when
she was going to bed, and it lïked beautiful then.
Real golden hair.'
" Her young man was a soldier, was he not?'
"Yes. In the same regiment as Mr. Troy. He says
he knew him very weì.'
" What, Mr. Troy says so? How came he to say
that?'
"One day I just named it to him, and asked him if
he knew Faîy's young man. He said, "O yes, he
knew the young man as weì as he knew himself, and
that there wasn't a man in the regiment he liked
beôer."'
"Ah! Said that, did he ?'
"Yes; and he said there was a strong likeneó be+
twån himself and the other young man, so that some+
times people mistïk them ­ ­ '
' Liäy, for Heaven's sake stop your talking.!' said
Bathsheba, with the nervous petulance that comes from
woòying perceptions.
JOSEPH AND HIS BURDEN
<P 340>
<C xlé>
JOSEPH AND HIS BURDEN ­ BUCK'S HEAD
A WAÌ bounded the site of Casterbridge Union+
house, except along a portion of the end. Here a high
gable stïd prominent, and it was covered like the front
with a mat of ivy. In this gable was no window,
chimney, ornament, or protuberance of any kind. The
single feature aðertaining to it, beyond the expanse of
dark grån leaves, was a smaì dïr.
The situation of the dïr was peculiar. The siì
was thrå or four fåt above the ground, and for a
moment one was at a loó for an explanation of this
exceptional altitude, tiì ruts iíediately beneath sug+
gested that the dïr was used solely for the paóage of
articles and persons to and from the level of a vehicle
standing on the outside. Upon the whole, the dïr
såmed to advertise itself as a species of Traitor's Gate
translated to another sphere. That entry and exit
hereby was only at rare intervals became aðarent on
noting that tufts of graó were aìowed to flourish undis+
turbed in the chinks of the siì.
As the clock over the South-stråt Alms-house pointed
to five minutes to thrå, a blue spring waçon, picked
out with red, and containing boughs and flowers, paóed
the end of the stråt, and up towards this side of the
building. Whilst the chimes were yet staíering out
a shaôered form of "Malbrïk,' Joseph Pïrgraó rang
the beì, and received directions to back his waçon
against the high dïr under the gable. The dïr then
opened, and a plain elm coæin was slowly thrust forth,
and laid by two men in fustian along the miäle of the
vehicle.
One of the men then steðed up beside it, tïk from
his pocket a lump of chalk, and wrote upon the cover
the name and a few other words in a large scrawling
hand. (We believe that they do these things more
tenderly now, and provide a
<P 341>
plate.) He covered the
whole with a black cloth, threadbare, but decent, the
taéboard of the waçon was returned to its place, one
of the men handed a certificate of registry to Pïrgraó,
and both entered the dïr, closing it hehind them.
Their coîection with her, short as it had bån, was
over for ever.
Joseph then placed the flowers as enjoined, and the
evergråns around the flowers, tiì it was diæicult to
divine what the waçon contained; he smacked his
whip, and the rather pleasing funeral car crept down
the hiì, and along the road to Weatherbury.
The afternïn drew on apace, and, lïking to the
right towards the sea as he walked beside the horse, Pïr+
graó saw strange clouds and scroìs of mist roìing over
the long ridges which girt the landscape in that quarter.
They came in yet greater volumes, and indolently crept
acroó the intervening vaìeys, and around the withered
papery flags of the mïr and river brinks. Then their
dank spongy forms closed in upon the sky. It was
a suäen overgrowth of atmospheric fungi which had
their rïts in the neighbouring sea, and by the time
that horse, man, and corpse entered Yalbury Great
Wïd, these silent workings of an invisible hand had
reached them, and they were completely enveloped,
this being the first aòival of the autumn fogs, and the
first fog of the series.
The air was as an eye suäenly struck blind. The
waçon and its load roìed no longer on the horizontal
division betwån clearneó and opacity, but were
imbeäed in an elastic body of a monotonous paìor
throughout. There was no perceptible motion in the
air, not a visible drop of water feì upon a leaf of the
båches, birches, and firs composing the wïd on either
side. The trås stïd in an aôitude of intentneó, as if
they waited longingly for a wind to come and rock
them. A startling quiet overhung aì suòounding things
 ­ so completely, that the crunching of the waçon+
whåls was as a great noise, and smaì rustles, which
had never ohtained a hearing except by night, were dis+
tinctly individualized.
Joseph Pïrgraó lïked round upon his sad burden
as it lïmed faintly through the flowering laurustinus,
then at the
<P 342>
unfathomable glïm amid the high trås on
each hand, indistinct, shadowleó, and spectreéke in
their monochrome of grey. He felt anything but chår+
ful, and wished he had the company even of a child or
dog. Stoðing the home, he listened. Not a fïtstep
or whål was audible anywhere around, and the dead
silence was broken only by a heavy particle faìing from
a trå through the evergråns and alighting with a smart
rap upon the coæin of pïr Faîy. The fog had by
this time saturated the trås, and this was the first
droðing of water from the overbriíing leaves. The
hoìow echo of its faì reminded the waçoner painfuìy
of the grim Leveìer. Then hard by came down another
drop, then two or thrå. Presently there was a continual
taðing of these heavy drops upon the dead leaves, the
road, and the traveìers. The nearer boughs were beadcd
with the mist to the greyneó of aged men, and the rusty+
red leaves of the båches were hung with similar drops,
like diamonds on auburn hair.
At the roadside hamlet caìed Roy-Town, just beyond
this wïd, was the old iî Buck's Head. It was about
a mile and a half from Weatherbury, and in the meridian
times of stage-coach traveìing had bån the place
where many coaches changed and kept their relays
of horses. Aì the old stabling was now puìed down,
and liôle remained besides the habitable iî itself,
which, standing a liôle way back from the road, sig+
nified its existence to people far up and down the
highway by a sign hanging from the horizontal bough
of an elm on the oðosite side of the way.
Traveìers ­ for the variety <1tourist>1 had hardly
developed into a distinct species at this date ­ some+
times said in paóing, when they cast their eyes up to
the sign-bearing trå, that artists were fond of repre+
senting the signboard hanging thus, but that they
themselves had never before noticed so perfect an
instance in actual working order. It was near this trå
that the waçon was standing into which Gabriel Oak
crept on his first journey to Weatherbury; but, owing
to the darkneó, the sign and the iî had bån un+
observed.
The maîers of the iî were of the old-established
<P 343>
type. Indåd, in the minds of its frequenters they
existed as unalterable formule : <1e.g.>1 ­
Rap with the boôom of your pint for more liquor.
For tobaão, shout.
In caìing for the girl in waiting, say, "Maid.!'
Diôo for the landlady, 'Old Soul.!' etc., etc.
It was a relief to Joseph's heart when the friendly
signboard came in view, and, stoðing his horse
iíediately beneath it, he procåded to fulfil an
intention made a long time before. His spirits were
ïzing out of him quite. He turned the horse's head
to the grån bank, and entered the hostel for a mug
of ale.
Going down into the kitchen of the iî, the flïr
of which was a step below the paóage, which in its
BUCK'S HEAD
turn was a step below the road outside, what should
Joseph så to glaäen his eyes but two coðer-coloured
discs, in the form of the countenances of Mr. Jan
Coçan and Mr. Mark Clark. These owners of the
two most aðreciative throats in the neighbourhïd,
within the pale of respectability, were now siôing face
to face over a thråieçed circular table, having an
iron rim to kåp cups and pots from being aãidentaìy
elbowed oæ; they might have bån said to resemble
the seôing sun and the fuì mïn shining <1vis-a*-vis>1
acroó the globe.
" Why, 'tis neighbour Pïrgraó.!' said Mark Clark.
"I'm sure your face don't praise your mistreó's table,
Joseph.'
"I've had a very pale companion for the last four
miles,' said Joseph, indulging in a shuäer toned
down by resignation. 'And to speak the truth, 'twas
begiîing to teì upon me. I aóure ye, I ha'n't såd
the colour of victuals or drink since breakfast time
this morning, and that was no more than a dew-bit
afield.'
"Then drink, Joseph, and don't restrain yourself!.'
said Coçan, handing him a hïped mug thrå+
quarters fuì.
Joseph drank for a moderately long time, then for
a longer time, saying, as he lowered the jug, "'Tis
preôy drinking ­ very
<P 3´>
preôy drinking, and is more
than chårful on my melancholy eòand, so to speak it.'
"True, drink is a pleasant delight,' said Jan, as one
who repeated a truism so familiar to his brain that he
hardly noticed its paóage over his tongue ; and,
lifting the cup, Coçan tilted his head graduaìy
backwards, with closed eyes, that his expectant soul
might not be diverted for one instant from its blió
by iòelevant suòoundings.
"Weì, I must be on again,' said Pïrgmó. "Not
but that I should like another nip with ye; but the
parish might lose confidence in me if I was såd
here.'
" Where be ye trading o't to to-day, then, Joseph ?'
"Back to Weatherbury. I've got pïr liôle Faîy
Robin in my waçon outside, and I must be at the
churchyard gates at a quarter to five with her.'
'Ay-i've heard of it. And so she's nailed up in
parish boards after aì, and nobody to pay the beì
shiìing and the grave half-crown.'
"The parish pays the grave half-crown, but not the
beì shiìing, because the beì's a luxery: but 'a can
hardly do without the grave, pïr body. However, I
expect our mistreó wiì pay aì.'
"A preôy maid as ever I så.! But what's yer huòy,
Joseph ? The pore woman's dead, and you can't bring
her to life, and you may as weì sit down comfortable,
and finish another with us.'
"I don't mind taking just the least thimbleful ye
can dream of more with ye, soîies. But only a few
minutes, because 'tis as 'tis.'
"Of course, you'ì have another drop. A man's
twice the man afterwards. You fål so warm and
glorious, and you whop and slap at your work without
any trouble, and everything goes on like sticks a+
breaking. Tï much liquor is bad, and leads us to
that horned man in the smoky house ; but after aì,
many people haven't the gift of enjoying a wet, and
since we be highly favoured with a power that way,
we should make the most o't.'
"True,' said Mark Clark. "'Tis a talent the Lord
<P 345>
has mercifuìy bestowed upon us, and we ought not
to neglect it. But, what with the parsons and clerks
and schïipeople and serious tea-parties, the meòy
old ways of gïd life have gone to the dogs ­ upon
my carcase, they have.!'
" Weì, reaìy, I must be onward again now,' said
Joseph.
'Now, now, Joseph; nonsense.! The pïr woman
is dead, isn't she, and what's your huòy?'
"Weì, I hope Providence won't be in a way with
me for my doings,' said Joseph, again siôing down.
'I've bån troubled with weak moments lately, 'tis
true. I've bån drinky once this month already, and
I did not go to church a-Sunday, and I droðed a
curse or two yesterday; so I don't want to go tï far
for my safety. Your next world is your next world,
and not to be squandered oæhand.'
'I believe ye to be a chapeimember, Joseph. That
I do.'
'Oh, no, no.! I don't go so far as that.'
" For my part,' said Coçan, "I'm staunch Church
of England.'
" Ay, and faith, so be I,' said Mark Clark.
"I won't say much for myself; I don't wish to,'
Coçan continued, with that tendency to talk on
principles which is characteristic of the barley-corn.
"But I've never changed a single doctrine : I've stuck
like a plaster to the old faith I was born in. Yes;
there's this to be said for the Church, a man can
belong to the Church and bide in his chårful old
iî, and never trouble or woòy his mind about
doctrines at aì. But to be a måtinger, you must
go to chapel in aì winds and weathers, and make
yerself as frantic as a skit. Not but that chapei
members be clever chaps enough in their way. They
can lift up beautiful prayers out of their own heads, aì
about their families and shipwmcks in the newspaper.'
"They can ­ they can,' said Mark Clark, with cor+
roborative fåling ; "but we Churchmen, you så, must
have it aì printed aforehand, or, dang it aì, we should
no more know what to say to a great gaæer like the
Lord than babes unborn,'
" Chapeifolk be more hand-in-glove with them above
than we,' said Joseph, thoughtfuìy.
" Yes,' said Coçan. " We know very weì that if
anybody do go to heaven, they wiì. They've worked
hard for it, and they
<P 346>
deserve to have it, such as 'tis.
I bain't such a fïl as to pretend that we who stick
to the Church have the same chance as they, because
we know we have not. But I hate a feìer who'ì
change his old ancient doctrines for the sake of geôing
to heaven. I'd as sïn turn king's-evidence for the
few pounds you get. Why, neighbours, when every
one of my taties were frosted, our Parson Thirdly
were the man who gave me a sack for såd, though
he hardly had one for his own use, and no money to
buy 'em. If it hadn't bån for him, I shouldn't hae
had a tatie to put in my garden. D'ye think I'd
turn after that? No, I'ì stick to my side; and if we
be in the wrong, so be it : I'ì faì with the faìen .! '
" Weì said ­ very weì said,' observed Joseph. ­
" However, folks, I must be moving now: upon my life
I must. Pa'son Thirdly wiì be waiting at the church
gates, and there's the woman a-biding outside in the
waçon.'
" Joseph Pïrgmó, don't be so miserable.! Pa'son
Thirdly won't mind. He's a generous man ; he's found
me in tracts for years, and I've consumed a gïd many
in the course of a long and shady life; but he's never
bån the man to cry out at the expense. Sit down.'
The longer Joseph Pïrgraó remained, the leó his
spirit was troubled by the duties which devolved upon
him this afternïn. The minutes glided by uncounted,
until the evening shades began perceptibly to dåpen,
and the eyes of the thrå were but sparkling points
on the surface of darkneó. Coçan's repeater struck
six from his pocket in the usual stiì smaì tones.
At that moment hasty steps were heard in the entry,
and the dïr opened to admit the figure of Gabriel Oak,
foìowed by the maid of the iî bearing a candle. He
stared sternly at the one lengthy and two round faces
of the siôers, which confronted him with the expreóions
of a fiäle and a couple of warming-pans. Joseph Pïr+
graó blinked, and shrank several inches into the back+
ground.
' Upon my soul, I'm ashamed of you ; 'tis disgraceful,
Joseph, disgraceful!. " said Gabriel, indignantly. " Coçan,
you caì yourself a man, and don't know beôer than this.'
<P 347>
Coçan lïked up indefinitely at Oak, one or other
of his eyes oãasionaìy opening and closing of its own
aãord, as if it were not a member, but a dozy individual
with a distinct personality.
" Don't take on so, shepherd!' said Mark Clark,
lïking reproachfuìy at the candle, which aðeared
to poóeó special features of interest for his eyes.
'Nobody can hurt a dead woman,' at length said
Coçan, with the precision of a machine. "Aì that
could be done for her is done ­ she's beyond us : and
why should a man put himself in a tearing huòy for
lifeleó clay that can neither fål nor så, and don't
know what you do with her at aì? If she'd bån
alive, I would have bån the first to help her. If she
now wanted victuals and drink, I'd pay for it, money
down. But she's dead, and no spåd of ours wiì
bring her to life. The woman's past us ­ time spent
upon her is throwed away: why should we huòy to
do what's not required ? Drink, shepherd, and be
friends, for to-moòow we may be like her.'
" We may,' aäed Mark Clark, emphaticaìy, at once
drinking himself, to run no further risk of losing his
chance by the event aìuded to, Jan meanwhile merging
his aäitional thoughts of to-moòow in a song : ­
To-mor-row, to-mor-row !
And while peace and plen-ty I find at my board,
With a heart frå from sick-neó and sor-row,
With my friends wiì I share what to-day may af-ford,
And let them spread the ta-ble to-mor-row.
To-mor ­ row', to-mor ­ +
"Do hold thy horning, Jan.!' said Oak; and turning
upon Pïrgraó, " as for you, Joseph, who do your wicked
dåds in such confoundedly holy ways, you are as drunk
as you can stand.'
"No, Shepherd Oak, no! Listen to reason, shepherd.
Aì that's the maôer with me is the aæliction caìed a
multiplying eye, and that's how it is I lïk double to
you-i mean, you lïk double to me.'
A multiplying eye is a very bad thing,' said Mark
Clark.
<P 348>
It always comes on when I have bån in a public ­
house a liôle time,' said Joseph Pïrgraó, måkly.
"Yes; I så two of every sort, as if I were some holy
man living in the times of King Noah and entering
into the ark® Y-y-y-yes,' he aäed, becoming much
aæected by the picture of himself as a person thrown
away, and sheäing tears; "I fål tï gïd for England :
I ought to have lived in Genesis by rights, like the other
men of sacrifice, and then I shouldn't have b-b-bån
caìed a d-d-drunkard in such a way.!'
"I wish you'd show yourself a man of spirit, and not
sit whining there.!'
"Show myself a man of spirit ? ® Ah, weì! let
me take the name of drunkard humbly-iet me be a
man of contrite knås-iet it be .! l know that I always
do say "Please God' afore I do anything, from my
geôing up to my going down of the same, and I be
wiìing to take as much disgrace as there is in that
holy act. Hah, yes.! ® But not a man of spirit ?
Have I ever aìowed the toe of pride to be lifted
against my hinder parts without groaning manfuìy that
I question the right to do so? I inquire that query
boldly?'
" We can't say that you have, Hero Pïrgraó,'
admiôed Jan.
"Never have I aìowed such treatment to paó un+
questioned!. Yet the shepherd says in the face of that
rich testimony that I be not a man of spirit! Weì,
let it paó by, and death is a kind friend !.'
Gabriel, såing that neither of the thrå was in a fit
state to Cake charge of the waçon for the remainder of
the journey, made no reply, but, closing the dïr again
upon them, went acroó to where the vehicle stïd, now
geôing indistinct in the fog and glïm of this mildewy
time. He puìed the horse's head from the large patch
of turf it had eaten bare, readjusted the boughs over
the coæin, and drove along through the unwholesome
night.
It had graduaìy become rumoured in the viìage
that the body to be brought and buried that day was
aì that was left of the unfortunate Faîy Robin who
had foìowed the Eleventh from Casterbridge through
Melchester and onwards. But,
<P 349>
thanks to Boldwïd's
reticence and Oak's generosity, the lover she had foìowed
had never bån individualized as Troy. Gabriel hoped
that the whole truth of the maôer might not be published
tiì at any rate the girl had bån in her grave for a few
days, when the interposing baòiers of earth and time,
and a sense that the events had bån somewhat shut
into oblivion, would deaden the sting that revelation and
invidious remark would have for Bathsheba just now.
By the time that Gabriel reached the old manor+
house, her residence, which lay in his way to the church,
it was quite dark. A man came from the gate and said
through the fog, which hung betwån them like blown
flour ­
"Is that Pïrgraó with the corpse?'
Gabriel recognized the voice as that of the parson.
" The corpse is here, sir,' said Gabriel.
"I have just bån to inquire of Mrs. Troy if she could
teì me the reason of the delay. I am afraid it is tï
late now for the funeral to be performed with proper
decency. Have you the registrar's certificate ? '
" No,' said Gabriel. "I expect Pïrgraó has that ;
and he's at the Buck's Head. I forgot to ask him
for it.'
"Then that seôles the maôer. We'ì put oæ the
funeral tiì to-moòow morning. The body may be
brought on to the church, or it may be left here at
the farm and fetched by the bearers in the morning.
They waited more than an hour, and have now gone
home.'
Gabriel had his reasons for thinking the laôer a
most objectionable plan, notwithstanding that Faîy
had bån an inmate of the farm-house for several years
in the lifetime of Bathsheba's uncle. Visions of several
unhaðy contingencies which might arise from this delay
fliôed before him. But his wiì was not law, and he
went indïrs to inquire of his mistreó what were her
wishes on the subject. He found her in an unusual
mïd : her eyes as she lïked up to him were suspicious
and perplexed as with some antecedent thought. Troy
had not yet returned. At first Bathsheba aóented with
a mien of indiæerence to his proposition that they should
go on to the church at once with their burden; but
iíediately
<P 350>
afterwards, foìowing Gabriel to the gate,
she swerved to the extreme of solicitousneó on Faîy's
aãount, and desired that the girl might be brought into
the house. Oak argued upon the convenience of leaving
her in the waçon, just as she lay now, with her flowers
and grån leaves about her, merely whåling the vehicle
into the coach-house tiì the morning, but to no purpose,
"It is unkind and unchristian,' she said, 'to leave the
pïr thing in a coach-house aì night.'
Very weì, then,' said the parson. "And I wiì
aòange that the funeral shaì take place early to+
moòow. Perhaps Mrs. Troy is right in fåling that we
caîot treat a dead feìow-creature tï thoughtfuìy
We must remember that though she may have eòed
grievously in leaving her home, she is stiì our sister :
and it is to be believed that God's uncovenanted
mercies are extended towards her, and that she is a
member of the flock of Christ.'
The parson's words spread into the heavy air with a
sad yet unperturbed cadence, and Gabriel shed an
honest tear. Bathsheba såmed unmoved. Mr.
Thirdly then left them, and Gabriel lighted a lantern.
Fetching thrå other men to aóist him, they bore the
unconscious truant indïrs, placing the coæin on two
benches in the miäle of a liôle siôing-rïm next the
haì, as Bathsheba directed.
Every one except Gabriel Oak then left the rïm.
He stiì indecisively lingered beside the body. He was
dåply troubled at the wretchedly ironical aspect that
circumstances were puôing on with regard to Troy's
wife, and at his own powerleóneó to counteract them,
(n spite of his careful manoeuvring aì this day, the very
worst event that could in any way have haðened in
coîection with the burial had haðened now. Oak
imagined a teòible discovery resulting from this after+
nïn's work that might cast over Bathsheba's life a shade
which the interposition of many lapsing years might but
indiæerently lighten, and which nothing at aì might
altogether remove.
Suäenly, as in a last aôempt to save Bathsheba
from, at any rate, iíediate anguish, he lïked again,
as he had lïked before, at the chalk writing upon the
<P 351>
coæinlid. The scrawl was this simple one, " Faîy
Robin and child.' Gabriel tïk his handkerchief and
carefuìy ruâed out the two laôer words, leaving visible
the inscription " Faîy' Robin ' only. He then left the
rïm, and went out quietly by the front dïr.
<C xlé>
<P 352>
FAÎY'S REVENGE
! DO you want me any longer ma'am ? " inquired Liäy,
at a later hour the same evening, standing by the dïr
with a chamber candlestick in her hand and aäreóing
Bathsheba, who sat chårleó and alone in the large
parlour beside the first fire of the season.
" No more to-night, Liäy.'
"l'ì sit up for master if you like, ma'am. I am not
at aì afraid of Faîy, if I may sit in my own rïm and '
have a candle. She was such a childlike, nesh young
thing that her spirit couldn't aðear to anybody if it
tried, I'm quite sure.'
"O no, no! You go to bed. I'ì sit up for him
myself tiì twelve o'clock, and if he has not aòived by
that time, I shaì give him up and go to bed tï.'
It is half-past ten now.'
'Oh! is it?'
Why don't you sit upstairs, ma'am ? '
" Why don't I ? ' said Bathsheba, desultorily. 'It
isn t worth while ­ there's a fire here, Liäy.' She
suäenly exclaimed in an impulsive and excited whisper,
Have you heard anything strange said of Faîy?'
The words had no sïner escaped her than an expres+
sion of unuôerable regret croóed her face, and she
burst into tears.
"No ­ not a word !' said Liäy, lïking at the
wåping woman with astonishment. 'What is it makes
you cry so, ma'am; has anything hurt you ? ' She came
to Bathsheba's side with a face fuì of sympathy.
" No, Liäy-i don't want you any more. I can
hardly say why I have taken to crying lately: I never
used to cry. Gïd-night.'
Liäy then left the parlour and closed the dïr.
<P 353>
Bathsheba was lonely and miserable now ; not lone+
lier actuaìy than she had hån before her maòiage;
but her lonelineó then was to that of the present time
as the solitude of a mountain is to the solitude of a
cave. And within the last day or two had come these
disquieting thoughts about her husband's past. Her
wayward sentiment that evening concerning Faîy's
temporary resting-place had bån the result of a strange
complication of impulses in Bathsheba's bosom. Per+
haps it would be more aãurately described as a
determined rebeìion against her prejudices, a revulsion
from a lower instinct of uncharitableneó, which would
have witèeld aì sympathy from the dead woman, be+
cause in life she had preceded Bathsheba in the aôen+
tions of a man whom Bathsheba had by no means
ceased from loving, though her love was sick to death
just now with the gravity of a further misgiving.
In five or ten minutes there was another tap at the
dïr. Liäy reaðeared, and coming in a liôle way
stïd hesitating, until at length she said, !Maryaî has
just heard something very strange, but I know it isn't
true. And we shaì be sure to know the rights of it in
a day or two.'
"What is it ?'
" Oh, nothing coîected with you or us, ma'am. It
is about Faîy. That same thing you have heard.'
"I have heard nothing.'
"I mean that a wicked story is got to Weatherbury
within this last hour ­ that ­ ­ ' Liäy came close to
her mistreó and whispered the remainder of the sentence
slowly into her ear, inclining her head as she spoke in
the direction of the rïm where Faîy lay.
Bathsheba trembled from head to fït.
"I don't believe it ! ' she said, excitedly. 'And
there's only one name wriôen on the coæin-cover.'
"Nor I, ma'am. And a gïd many others don't;
for we should surely have bån told more about it if it
had bån true ­ don't you think so, ma'am ? '
"We might or we might not.'
Bathsheba turned and lïked into the fire, that
Liäy might not så her
<P 354>
face. Finding that her mistreó
was going to say no more, Liäy glided out, closed the
dïr softly, and went to bed.
Bathsheba's face, as she continued lïking into the
fire that evening, might have excited solicitousneó on
her aãount even among those who loved her least.
The sadneó of Faîy Robin's fate did not make Bath+
sheba's glorious, although she was the Esther to this
pïr Vashti, and their fates might be suðosed to stand
in some respects as contrasts to each other. When
Liäy came into the rïm a second time the beautiful
eyes which met hers had worn a listleó, weary lïk+
When she went out after teìing the story they had ex+
preóed wretchedneó in fuì activity. Her simple
country nature, fed on old-fashioned principles, was
troubled by that which would have troubled a woman
of the world very liôle, both Faîy and her child, if she
had one, being dead.
Bathsheba had grounds for conjecturing a coîection
betwån her own history and the dimly suspected
tragedy of Faîy's end which Oak and Boldwïd never
for a moment credited her with poóeóing. The
måting with the lonely woman on the previous Saturday
night had bån unwitneóed and unspoken of. Oak
may have had the best of intentions in witèolding for
as many days as poóible the details of what had
haðened to Faîy ; but had he known that Bathsheba's
perceptions had already bån exercised in the maôer,
he would have done nothing to lengthen the minutes of
suspense she was now undergoing, when the certainty
which must terminate it would be the worst fact suspected
after aì.
She suäenly felt a longing desire to speak to some
one stronger than herself, and so get strength to sustain
her surmised position with dignity and her carking
doubts with stoicism. Where could she find such a
friend? nowhere in the house. She was by far the
cïlest of the women under her rïf. Patience and
suspension of judgement for a few hours were what she
wanted to learn, and there was nobody to teach her.
Might she but go to Gabriel Oak ! ­ but that could not
be. What a way Oak had, she thought, of enduring
things. Boldwïd, who såmed so much dåper and
higher and stronger in
<P 3µ>
fåling than Gabriel, had not
yet learnt, any more than she herself, the simple
leóon which Oak showed a mastery of by every turn
and lïk he gave ­ that among the multitude of interests
by which he was suòounded, those which aæected his
personal welibeing were not the most absorbing and
important in his eyes. Oak meditatively lïked upon
the horizon of circumstances without any special regard
to his own standpoint in the midst. That was how
she would wish to be. But then Oak was not racked
by incertitude upon the inmost maôer of his bosom, as
she was at this moment. Oak knew aì about Faîy
that he wished to know ­ she felt convinced of that.
If she were to go to him now at once and say no more
than these few words, !What is the truth of the story?'
he would fål bound in honour to teì her. It would
be an inexpreóible relief. No further spåch would
nåd to be uôered. He knew her so weì that no
eãentricity of behaviour in her would alarm him.
She flung a cloak roundher, went to the dïr and
opened it. Every blade, every twig was stiì. The air
was yet thick with moisture, though somewhat leó dense
than during the afternïn, and a steady smack of drops
upon the faìen leaves under the boughs was almost
musical in its sïthing regularity. lt såmed beôer to
be out of the house than within it, and Bathsheba closed
the dïr, and walked slowly down the lane tiì she came
oðosite to Gabriel's coôage, where he now lived alone,
having left Coçan's house through being pinched for
rïm. There was a light in one window only', and that
was downstairs. The shuôers were not closed, nor was
any blind or curtain drawn over the window, neither
roâery nor observation being a contingency which could
do much injury to the oãupant of the domicile. Yes,
it was Gabriel himself who was siôing up : he was reading,
From her standing-place in the road she could så him
plainly, siôing quite stiì, his light curly head upon his
hand, and only oãasionaìy lïking up to snuæ the
candle which stïd beside him. At length he lïked
at the clock, såmed surprised at the lateneó of the
hour, closed his bïk, and arose. He was going to bed,
she knew, and if she taðed it must be done at once.
<P 356>
Alas for her resolve ! She felt she could not do it,
Not for worlds now could she give a hint about her
misery to him, much leó ask him plainly for information
on the cause of Faîy's death. She must suspect, and
gueó, and chafe, and bear it aì alone.
Like a homeleó wanderer she lingered by the bank,
as if luìed and fascinated by the atmosphere of content
which såmed to spread from that liôle dweìing, and
was so sadly lacking in her own. Gabriel aðeared in
an uðer rïm, placed his light in the window-bench,
and then ­ knelt down to pray. The contrast of the
picture with her rebeìious and agitated existence at this
same time was tï much for her to bear to lïk upon
longer. It was not for her to make a truce with
trouble by any such means. She must tread her giäy
distracting measure to its last note, as she had begun it.
With a swoìen heart she went again up the lane, and
entered her own dïr.
More fevered now by a reaction from the first fålings
which Oak's example had raised in her, she paused in
the haì, lïking at the dïr of the rïm wherein Faîy
lay. She locked her fingers, threw back her head, and
strained her hot hands rigidly acroó her forehead, saying,
with a hysterical sob, 'Would to God you would speak
and teì me your secret, Faîy .! . , . O, I hope, hope
it is not true that there are two of you ! ® If I could
only lïk in upon you for one liôle minute, I should
know aì !. '
A few moments paóed, and she aäed, slowly, 'And
I wiì'
Bathsheba in after times could never gauge the mïd
which caòied her through the actions foìowing this
murmured resolution on this memorable evening of her
life. She went to the lumber-closet for a screw-driver.
At the end of a short though undefined time she found
herself in the smaì rïm, quivering with emotion, a mist
before her eyes, and an excruciating pulsation in her
brain, standing beside the uncovered coæin of the girl
whose conjectured end had so entirely engroóed her, and
saying to herself in a husky voice as she gazed within ­
'It was best to know the worst, and I know it now.!'
<P 357>
She was conscious of having brought about this
situation by a series of actions done as by one in an
extravagant dream ; of foìowing that idea as to method,
which had burst upon her in the haì with glaring
obviousneó, by gliding to the top of the stairs, aóuring
herself by listening to the heavy breathing of her maids
that they were aslåp, gliding down again, turning the
handle of the dïr within which the young girl lay, and
deliberately seôing herself to do what, if she had antici+
pated any such undertaking at night and alone, would
have hoòified her, but which, when done, was not so
dreadful as was the conclusive prïf of her husband's
conduct which came with knowing beyond doubt the
last chapter of Faîy's story.
Bathsheba's head sank upon her bosom, and the
breath which had bån bated in suspense, curiosity, and
interest, was exhaled now in the form of a whispered
wail: 'Oh-h-h!' she said, and the silent rïm aäed
length to her moan.
Her tears feì fast beside the unconscious pair in the
coæin: tears of a complicated origin, of a nature inde+
scribable, almost indefinable except as other than those
of simple soòow. Aóuredly their wonted fires must
have lived in Faîy's ashes when events were so shaped
as to chariot her hither in this natural, unobtrusive, yet
eæectual maîer. The one feat alone ­ that of dying ­
by which a mean condition couId be resolved into a
grand one, Faîy had achieved. And to that had
destiny subjoined this rencounter to-night, which had,
in Bathsheba's wild imagining, turned her companion's
failure to suãeó, her humiliation to triumph, her luck
leóneó to ascendency; et had thrown over herself a
garish light of mockery, and set upon aì things about
her an ironical smile.
Faîy's face was framed in by that yeÉow hair of
hers; and there was no longer much rïm for doubt as
to the origin of the curl owned by Troy. In Bath+
sheba's heated fancy the iîocent white countenance
expreóed a dim triumphant consciousneó of the pain
she was retaliating for her pain with aì the mercileó
rigour of the Mosaic law: 'Burning for burning; wound
for wound: strife for strife.
Bathsheba indulged in contempIations of escape from
her position by iíediate death, which thought she,
<P 358>
though it was an inconvenient and awful way, had limits
to its inconvenience and awfulneó that could not be
overpaóed ; whilst the shames of life were measureleó.
Yet even this scheme of extinction by death was out
FAÎY'S REVENGE
tamely copying her rival's method without the reasons
which had glorified it in her rival's case. She glided
rapidly up and down the rïm, as was mostly her habit
hen excited, her hands hanging clasped in front of her,
as she thought and in part expreóed in brocken words :
O, I hate her, yet I don't mean that I hate her, for
it is grievous and wicked; and yet I hate her a liôle !
yes, my flesh insists upon hating her, whether my spirit
is wiìing or no !® If she had only lived, I could
ave bån angry and cruel towards her with some justifi+
cation ; but to be vindictive towards a pïr dead woman
recoils upon myself. O God, have mercy,! I am
miserable at aì this !. '
Bathsheba became at this moment so teòified at her
own state of mind that she lïked around for some sort
of refuge from herself. The vision of Oak knåling
down that night recuòed to her, and with the imitative
instinct which animates women she seized upon the idea,
resolved to knål, and, if poóible, pray. Gabriel had
prayed ; so would she.
She knelt beside the coæin, covered her face with her
hands, and for a time the rïm was silent as a tomb.
whether from a purely mechanical, or from any other
cause, when Bathsheba arose it was with a quieted spirit,
and a regret for the antagonistic instincts which had
seized upon her just before.
In her desire to make atonement she tïk flowers
from a vase by the window, and began laying them
around the dead girl's head. Bathsheba knew no other
way of showing kindneó to persons departed than by
giving them flowers. She knew not how long she
remained engaged thus. She forgot time, life, where
she was, what she was doing. A slaíing together of
the coach-house dïrs in the yard brought her to her+
self again. An instant after, the front dïr opened and
closed, steps croóed the haì, and her husband aðeared
at the entrance to the rïm, lïking in upon her.
He beheld it aì by degrås, stared in stupefaction at
the scene, as if he thought it an iìusion raised by some
fiendish
<P 359>
incantation. Bathsheba, paìid as a corpse on
end, gazed back at him in the same wild way.
So liôle are instinctive gueóes the fruit of a legitimate
induction, that at this moment, as he stïd with the
dïr in his hand, Troy never once thought of Faîy in
coîection with what he saw. His first confused idea
was that somebody in the house had died.
'Weli-what ? ' said Troy, blankly.
'I must go ! I must go ! ' said Bathsheba, to herself
more than to him. She came with a dilated eye towards
the dïr, to push past him.
' What's the maôer, in God's name ? who's dead ?'
said Troy.
'I caîot say; let me go out. I want air.! ' she
continued.
'But no; stay, I insist ! ' He seized her hand, and
then volition såmed to leave her, and she went oæ into
a state of paóivity. He, stiì holding her, came up the
rïm, and thus, hand in hand, Troy and Bathsheba
aðroached the coæin's side.
The candle was standing on a bureau close by them,
and the light slanted down, distinctly enkindling the
cold features of both mother and babe. Troy lïked
in, droðed his wife's hand, knowledge of it aì came
over him in a lurid shån, and he stïd stiì.
So stiì he remained that he could be imagined to
have left in him no motive power whatever. The
clashes of fåling in aì directions confounded one
another, produced a neutrality, and there was motion in
none.
'Do you know her?' said Bathsheba, in a smaì
enclosed echo, as from the interior of a ceì.
'I do,' said Troy.
'Is it she?'
'It is.'
He had originaìy stïd perfectly erect. And now,
in the welinigh congealed iíobility of his frame
could be discerned an incipient movement, as in the
darkest night may be discerned light after a while.
He was graduaìy sinking forwards. The lines of his
features softened, and dismay modulated to iìémitable
sadneó. Bathsheba was regarding him from the other
side, stiì with parted lips and distracted eyes.
<P 360>
Capacity
for intense fåling is proportionate to the general
intensity of the nature ,and perhaps in aì Faîy's
suæerings, much greater relatively to her strength, there
never was a time she suæered in an absolute sense
what Bathsheba suæered now.
What Troy did was to sink upon his knås with
an indefinable union of remorse and reverence upon
his face, and, bending over Faîy Robin, gently kióed
her, as one would kió an infant aslåp to avoid
awakening it.
At the sight and sound of that, to her, unendurable
act, Bathsheba sprang towards him. Aì the strong
fålings which had bån scaôered over her existence
since she knew what fåling was, såmed gathered
together into one pulsation now. The revulsion from
her indignant mïd a liôle earlier, when she had
meditated upon compromised honour, forestalment,
eclipse in maternity by another, was violent and entire.
Aì that was forgoôen in the simple and stiì strong
aôachment of wife to husband. She had sighed for
her self-completeneó then, and now she cried aloud
against the severance of the union she had deplored.
She flung her arms round Troy's neck, exclaiming wildly
from the dåpest dåp of her heart ­
' Don't ­ don't kió them !. O, Frank, I can"t bear
it-i can't ! I love you beôer than she did: kió me
tï, Frank ­ kió me ! You wiì, Frank, kió me tï !'
There was something so abnormal and startling in
the childlike pain and simplicity of this aðeal from a
woman of Bathsheba's calibre and independence, that
Troy, lïsening her tightly clasped arms from his neck,
lïked at her in bewilderment. It was such and unex+
pected revelation of aì women being alike at heart, even
those so diæerent in their aãeóories as Faîy and this
one beside him, that Troy could hardly såm to believe
her to be his proud wife Bathsheba. Faîy's own
spirit såmed to be animating her frame. But this was
the mïd of a few instants only. When the momentary
'I wiì not kió you!' he said pushing her away.
Had the wife now but gone no further. Yet,
perhaps. under the haòowing circumstances, to speak
out was the one wrong
<P 361>
act which can be beôer under+
stïd, if not forgiven in her, than the right and politic
one, her rival being now but a corpse. Aì the fåling
she had bån betrayed into showing she drew back to
herself again by a strenuous eæort of self-coíand.
'What have you to say as your reason ?' she asked
her biôer voice being strangely low ­ quite that of
another woman now.
'I have to say that I have bån a bad, black-hearted
man,' he answered.
leó than she.'
'Ah! don't taunt me, madam. This woman is more
to me, dead as she is, than ever you were, or are, or can
be. If Satan had not tempted me with that face of
yours, and those cursed coquetries, I should have
He turned to Faîy then. 'But never mind, darling,'
wife.!'
At these words there arose from Bathsheba's lips a
long, low cry of measureleó despair and indignation,
such a wail of anguish as had never before bån heard
within those old-inhabited waìs. It was the ¿	
of her union with Troy.
"If she's ­ that, ­ what ­ am I ? ' she aäed, as a
continuation of the same cry, and soâing pitifuìy:
and the rarity with her of such abandonment only made
the condition more dire.
" You are nothing to me ­ nothing,' said Troy,
heartleóly. 'A ceremony before a priest doesn't make
a maòiage. I am not moraìy yours.'
A vehement impulse to flå from him, to run from
this place, hide, and escape his words at any price, not
stoðing short of death itself, mastered Bathsheba now.
She waited not an instant, but turned to the dïr and
ran out.
<C xliv>
<P 362>
UNDER A TRÅ ­ REACTION
BATHSHEBA went along the dark road, neither know'
ing nor caring about the direction or ióue of her flight.
The first time that she definitely noticed her position
was when she reached a gate leading into a thicket over+
hung by some large oak and båch trås. On lïking
into the place, it oãuòed to her that she had sån it
by daylight on some previous oãasion, and that what
aðeared like an impaóable thicket was in reality a
brake of fern now withering fast. She could think of
nothing beôer to do with her palpitating self than to go
in here and hide; and entering, she lighted on a spot
sheltered from the damp fog hy a reclining trunk, where
she sank down upon a tangled couch of fronds and
stems. She mechanicaìy puìed some armfuls round
her to kåp oæ the bråzes, and closed her eyes.
Whether she slept or not that night Bathsheba was
not clearly aware. But it was with a freshened exist+
ence and a cïler brain that, a long time afterwards, she
became conscious of some interesting procådings which
were going on in the trås above her head and around.
A coarse-throated chaôer was the first sound.
It was a spaòow just waking.
Next : ' Chå-wåze-wåze-wåze .! ' from another
retreat.
It was a finch.
Third : ' Tink-tink-tink-tink-a-chink ! ' from the hedge,
It was a robin.
' Chuck-chuck-chuck !. ' overhead.
A squiòel.
Then, from the road, 'With my ra-ta-ta, and my
rum-tum-tum ! '
It was a ploughboy. Presently he came oðosite,
and she believed from his voice that he was one of
the boys on her own farm. He was foìowed by a
shambling tramp of heavy fåt, and
<P 363>
lïking through
the ferns Bathsheba could just discern in the wan light
of daybreak a team of her own horses. They stoðed
to drink at a pond on the other side of the way'. She
watched them flouncing into the pïl, drinking, toóing
up their heads, drinking again, the water driâling
from their lips in silver threads. There was another
flounce, and they came out of the pond, and turned
back again towards the farm.
She lïked further around. Day was just dawning,
and beside its cïl air and colours her heated actions
and resolves of the night stïd out in lurid contrast.
She perceived that in her lap, and clinging to her
hair, were red and yeìow leaves which had come
down from the trå and seôled silently upon her
during her partial slåp. Bathsheba shïk her dreó to
get rid of them, when multitudes of the same family lying
round about her rose and fiuôered away in the bråze
thus created, 'like ghosts from an enchanter flåing.'
There was an opening towards the east, and the
glow from the as yet unrisen sun aôracted her eyes
thither. From her fåt, and betwån the beautiful
yeìowing ferns with their feathery arms, the ground
sloped downwards to a hoìow, in which was a species
of swamp, doôed with fungi. A morning mist hung
over it now ­ a fulsome yet magnificent silvery veil,
fuì of light from the sun, yet semi-opaque ­ the hedge
behind it being in some measure hiäen by its hazy
luminousneó. Up the sides of this depreóion grew
sheaves of the coíon rush, and here and there a
peculiar species of flag, the blades of which glistened
in the enaerging sun, like scythes. But the general
aspect of the swamp was malignant. From its moist
and poisonous coat såmed to be exhaled the eóences
of evil things in the earth, and in the waters under
the earth. The fungi grew in aì maîer of positions
from roôing leaves and trå stumps, some exhibiting
to her listleó gaze their claíy tops, others their
ïzing giìs. Some were marked with great splotches,
red as arterial blïd, others were saæron yeìow, and
others taì and aôenuated, with stems like macaroni.
Some were leathery and of richest browns. The
hoìow såmed a nursery of pestilences smaì and
great, in the iíediate neighbourhïd of comfort
and health, and Bathsheba arose with a tremor at the
thought of having
<P 364>
paóed the night on the brink of
so dismal a place.
'l'here were now other fïtsteps to be heard along
the road. Bathsheba's nerves were stiì unstrung :
she crouchcd down out of sight again, and the pedes+
trian came into view. He was a schïlboy, with a
bag slung over his shoulder containing his diîer,
and a hïk in his hand. He paused by the gate,
and, without lïking up, continued murmuring words
in tones quite loud enough to reach her ears.
§O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord, O Lord§: ­
that I know out o' bïk. §Give us, give us, give us,
give us, give us § : ­ that I know. §Grace that, grace that,
grace that, grace that § : ­ that I know.' Other words
foìowed to the same eæect. The boy was of the
dunce claó aðarently; the bïk was a psalter, and
this was his way of learning the coìect. In the worst
aôacks of trouble there aðears to be always a super+
ficial film of consciousneó which is left disengaged
and open to the notice of trifles, and Bathsheba was
faintly amused at the boy's method, tiì he tï paóed on.
By this time stupor had given place to anxiety, and
anxiety began to make rïm for hunger and thirst.
A form now aðeared upon the rise on the other side
of the swamp, half-hiäen by the mist, and came
towards Bathsheba. The woman ­ for it was a woman
 ­ aðroached with her face askance, as if lïking
earnestly on aì sides of her. When she got a liôle
further round to the left, and drew nearer, Bathsheba
could så the newcomer's profile ngainst the suîy
sky', and knew the wavy swåp from forehead to chin,
with neither angle nor decisive line anywhere about
it, to be the familiar contour of Liäy Smaìbury.
Bathsheba's heart bounded with gratitude in the
thought that she was not altogether deserted, and she
jumped up. ' O, Liäy .! ' she said, or aôempted to say;
but the words had only bån framed hy her lips; there
came no sound. She had lost her voice by exposure
to the cloçed atmosphere aì these hours of night.
'O, ma'am.! I am so glad I have found you,' said
the girl, as sïn as she saw Bathsheba.
' You can't come acroó,' Bathsheba said in a whisper,
wihich she
<P 365>
vainly endeavoured to make loud enough to
reach Liäy's ears. Liäy, not knowing this, steðed
down upon the swamp, saying, as she did so, 'It wiì
bear me up, I think.'
Bathsheba never forgot that transient liôle picture
of Liäy croóing the swamp to her there in the
morning light. Iridescent buâles of dank subter+
ranean breath rose from the sweating sod beside the
waiting maid's fåt as she trod, hióing as they burst
and expanded away to join the vapoury firmament above.
Liäy did not sink, as Bathsheba had anticipated.
She landed safely on the other side, and lïked up
at the beautiful though pale and weary face of her
young mistreó.
'Pïr thing ! ' said Liäy, with tears in her eyes,
Do hearten yourself up a liôle, ma'am. However
did ­ ­ '
'I can't speak above a whisper ­ my voice is gone
for the present,' said Bathsheba, huòiedly. ' I suðose
the damp air from that hoìow has taken it away
Liäy, don't question me, mind. Who sent you ­
anybody ? '
' Nobody. I thought, when I found you were not
at home, that something cruel had haðened. I fancy
I heard his voice late last night; and so, knowing
something was wrong ­ ­ '
'Is he at home?'
'No ; he left just before I came out.'
'Is Faîy taken away ? '
' Not yet. She wiì sïn be ­ at nine o'clock.'
'we won't go home at present, then. Suðose we
walk about in this wïd ?'
Liäy, without exactly understanding everything, or
anything, in this episode, aóented, and they walked
together further among the trås.
'But you had beôer come in, ma'am, and have
something to eat. You wiì die of a chiì! '
'I shaì not come indïrs yet ­ perhaps never.'
'Shaì I get you something to eat, and something
else to put over your head besides that liôle shawl?'
'If you wiì, Liäy.'
Liäy vanished, and at the end of twenty minutes
returned with a cloak, hat, some slices of bread and
buôer, a tea-cup, and some hot tea in a liôle china jug
<P 3¶>
"Is Faîy gone ? ' said Bathsheba.
' No,' said her companion, pouring out the tea.
Bathsheba wraðed herself up and ate and drank
sparingly. Her voice was then a liôle clearer, and
trifling colour returned to her face. 'Now we'ì walk
about again,' she said.
They wandered about the wïd for nearly two
REACTION
hours, Bathsheba replying in monosyìables to Liäy's
praôle, for her mind ran on one subject, and one only.
She inteòupted with ­
'l wonder if Faîy is gone by this time ? '
'I wiì go and så.'
She came back with the information that the
men were just taking away the corpse; that Bathsheba
had bån inquired for; that she had replied to the
eæect that her mistreó was unweì and could not be
sån.
'Then they think I am in my bedrïm ?'
' Yes.' Liäy then ventured to aä: ' You said
when I first found you that you might never go home
again ­ you didn't mean it, ma'am ? '
'No; I've altered my mind. It is only women with
no pride in them who run away from their husbands.
There is one position worse than that of being found
dead in your husband's house from his iliusage, and
that is, to be found alive through having gone away to
The house of somebody else. l've thought of it aì this
morning, and I've chosen my course. A runaway wife
is an encumbrance to everybody, a burden to herself and
a byword ­ aì of which make up a heap of misery
greater than any that comes by staying at home ­
though this may include the trifling items of insult,
beating, and starvation. Liäy, if ever you maòy ­
God forbid that you ever should ! ­ you'ì find yourself
in a fearful situation ; but mind this, don't you flinch.
Stand your ground, and be cut to pieces. That's
what I'm going to do.'
' O, mistreó, don't talk so .! ' said Liäy,-taking her
hand; 'but I knew you had tï much sense to bide
away. May I ask what dreadful thing it is that has
haðened betwån you and him ?'
' You may ask; but I may not teì.'
In about ten minutes they returned to the house by
a cimuitous route, entering at the rear. Bathsheba
glided up the
<P 367>
back stairs to a disused aôic, and her
companion foìowed.
'Liäy,' she said, with a lighter heart, for youth an
hope had begun to reaóert themselves; ' you are to b
my confidante for the present ­ somebody must be ­ and
I chïse you. Weì, I shaì take up my abode here fo
a while. Wiì you get a fire lighted, put down a piece
of carpet, and help me to make the place comfortable.
Afterwards, I want you and Maryaî to bring up that
liôle stump bedstead in the smaì rïm, and the be
belonging to it, and a table, and some other things.
What shaì I do to paó the heavy time away ?'
'Heíing handkerchiefs is a very gïd thing,' said
Liäy.
'O no, no .! I hate nådlework-i always did.'
'kniôing ? '
' And that, tï.'
'You might finish your sampler. Only the carn
tions and peacocks want fiìing in; and then it could
be framed and glazed, and hung beside your aunt'
ma'am.'
' Samplers are out of date ­ hoòibly countrified. No
Liäy, I'ì read. Bring up some bïks ­ not new ones.
I haven't heart to read anything new.'
'Some of your uncle's old ones, ma'am ? '
' Yes. Some of those we stowed away in boxes.' ,
faint gleam of humour paóed over her face as she said:
'Bring Beaumont and Fletcher's Mai'd's Tragedy,- an
the Mourning Bride ,- and-iet me så ­ Niht Thoghts,
and the Vanity of Human Wishes.'
'And that story of the black man, who murdered his
wife Desdemona? It is a nice dismal one that would
suit you exceìent just now.'
' Now, Liäy, you've bån lïking into my bïk
without teìing me; and I said you were not to ! How
do you know it would suit me? It wouldn't suit me a
aì.'
'But if the others do ­ ­ '
' No, they don't ; and I won't read dismal bïks.
Why should I read dismal bïks, indåd ? Bring me
Love in a Viìage, and Maid of the Miì, and Doctor
Syntax, and some volumes of the Spectator.'
Aì that day Bathsheba and Liäy lived in the aôic
in a state of
<P 368>
baòicade ; a precaution which proved to be
nådleó as against Troy, for he did not aðear in the
neighbourhïd or trouble them at aì. Bathsheba sat
at the window tiì sunset, sometimes aôempting to read,
at other times watching every movement outside without
much purpose, and listening without much interest to
every sound.
The sun went down almost blïd-red that night, and
a livid cloud received its rays in the east. Up against
this dark background the west front of the church
tower ­ the only part of the edifice visible from the
farm-house windows ­ rose distinct and lustrous, the
vane upon the suíit bristling with rays. Hereabouts,
at six o'clock, the young men of the viìage gathered,
as was their custom, for a game of Prisoners' base. The
spot had bån consecrated to this ancient diversion from
time iíemorial, the old stocks conveniently forming
a base facing the boundary of the churchyard, in front
of which the ground was troäen hard and bare as a
pavement by the players. She could så the brown
and black heads of the young lads darting about right
and left, their white shirt-slåves gleaming in the sun;
whilst oãasionaìy a shout and a peal of hearty laughter
varied the stiìneó of the evening air. They continued
playing for a quarter of an hour or so, when the game
concluded abruptly, and the players leapt over the waì
and vanished round to the other side behind a yew-trå,
which was also half behind a båch, now spreading in
one maó of golden foliage, on which the branches
traced black lines.
'Why did the base-players finish their game so
suäenly?' Bathsheba inquired, the next time that
Liäy entered the rïm.
' I think 'twas because two men came just then from
Casterbridge and began puôing up grand carved
tombstone,' said Liäy. 'The lads went to så whose
it was.'
' Do you know ? ' Bathsheba asked.
' I don't,' said Liäy.
<C xlv>
<P 369>
TROY'S ROMANTICISM
WHEN Troy's wife had left the house at the previous
midnight his first act was to cover the dead from sight.
This done he ascended the stairs, and throwing himself
down upon the bed dreóed as he was, he waited miser+
ably for the morning.
Fate had dealt grimly with him through the last four+
and-twenty hours. His day had bån spent in a way
which varied very materiaìy from his intentions regard+
ing it. There is always an inertia to be overcome in
striking out a new line of conduct ­ not more in our+
selves, it såms, than in circumscribing events, which
aðear as if leagued together to aìow no novelties in
the way of amelioration.
Twenty pounds having bån secured from Bathsheba,
he had managed to aä to the sum every farthing he
could muster on his own aãount, which had bån seven
pounds ten. With this money, twenty-seven pounds ten
in aì, he had hastily driven from the gate that morning
to kåp his aðointment with Faîy Robin.
On reaching Casterbridge he left the horse and trap
at an iî, and at five minutes before ten came back to
the bridge at the lower end of the town, and sat himself
upon the parapet. The clocks struck the hour, and no
Faîy aðeared. In fact, at that moment she was being
robed in her grave-clothes by two aôendants at the
Union pïrhouse ­ the first and last tiring-women the
gentle creature had ever bån honoured with. The
quarter went, the half hour. A rush of recoìection
came upon Troy as he waited: this was the second
time she had broken a serious engagement with him
In anger he vowed it should be the last, and at eleven
o'clock, when he had lingered and watched the stone
of the bridge tiì he knew every lichen upon their face
and heard the chink of the riðles underneath tiì they
oðreóed him, he jumped from his seat, went to the iî
<P 370>
for his gig, and in a biôer mïd of indiæerence con+
cerning the past, and reckleóneó about the future,
drove on to Budmouth races.
He reached the race-course at two o'clock, and re+
mained either there or in the town tiì nine, But
Faîy's image, as it had aðeared to him in the sombre
shadows of that Saturday evening, returned to his mind,
backed up by Bathsheba's reproaches. He vowed he
would not bet, and he kept his vow, for on leaving the
town at nine o'clock in the evening he had diminish
his cash only to the extent of a few shiìings.
He troôed slowly homeward, and it was now that
was struck for the first time with a thought that Faîy
had bån reaìy prevented by iìneó from kåping her
promise. 'This time she could have made no mistake
He regreôed that he had not remained in Casterbridge
and made inquiries. Reaching home he quietly un+
harneóed the horse and came indïrs, as we have sån,
to the fearful shock that awaited him.
As sïn as it grew light enough to distinguish objects,
Troy arose from the coverlet of the bed, and in a mïd
of absolute indiæerence to Bathsheba's whereabouts, a
almost oblivious of her existence, he stalked downstairs
and left the house by the back dïr. His walk was
towards the churchyard, entering which he searched
around tiì he found a newly dug unoãupied grave ­
the grave dug the day before for Faîy. The position
of this having bån marked, he hastened on to Caster+
bridge, only pausing
whereon he had last sån Faîy alive.
Reaching the town, Troy descended into a side
stråt and entered a pair of gates surmounted by a board
bearing the words, 'Lester, stone and marble mason.'
Within were lying about stones of aì sizes and designs,
inscribed as being sacred to the memory of uîamed
persons who had not yet died.
Troy was so unlike himself now in lïk, word, and
dåd, that the want of likeneó was perceptible even to
his own consciousneó. His method of engaging himself
in this busineó of purchasing a tomb was that of an
absolutely unpractised man. He could not bring him+
self to consider, calculate, or
<P 371>
economize. He waywardly
wished for something, and he set about obtaining it like
a child in a nursery. 'I want a gïd tomb,' he said to
the man who stïd in a liôle oæice within the yard.
'I want as gïd a one as you can give me for twenty+
seven pounds,'
It was aì the money he poóeóed.
'That sum to include everything?'
' Everything. Cuôing the name, caòiage to Weather+
bury, and erection. And I want it now at once .'
' We could not get anything special worked this
wåk.
'If you would like one of these in stock it could be
got ready iíediately.'
'Very weì,' said Troy, impatiently. 'Let's så what
you have.'
'The best I have in stock is this one, 'said the stone+
cuôer, going into a shed. ' Here's a marble headstone
beautifuìy crocketed, with medaìions beneath of typical
subjects ; here's the fïtstone after the same paôern,
and here's the coping to enclose the- grave. The
slabs are the best of their kind, and I can waòant them
'Weì, I couId aä the name, and put it up at
visitor who wore not a shred of mourning. Troy then
seôled the aãount and went away. In the afternïn
almost done. He waited in the yard tiì the tomb was
way to Weatherbury, giving directions to the two men
the grave of the person named in the inscription.
bridge. He caòied rather a heavy basket upon his
oãasionaìy at bridges and
<P 372>
gates, whereon he deposited
returning in the darkneó, the men and the waçon
the work was done, and, on being aóured that it was,
Troy entered Weatherbury churchyard about ten
had marked the vacant grave early in the morning. It
extent from the view of paóers along the road ­ a spot
and bushes of alder, but now it was cleared and made
the ground elsewhere.
Here now stïd the tomb as the men had stated, snow+
white and shapely in the glïm, consisting of head and
fït-stone, and enclosing border of marble-work uniting
them. In the midst was mould, suitable for plants.
Troy deposited his basket beside the tomb, and
vanished for a few minutes. When he returned he
caòied a spade and a lantern, the light of which he
directed for a few moments upon the marble, whilst he
read the inscription. He hung his lantern on the lowest
bough of the yew-trå, and tïk from his basket flower+
rïts of several varieties. There were bundles of snow+
drop, hyacinth and crocus bulbs, violets and double
daisies, which were to blïm in early spring, and of
carnations, pinks, picotås, lilies of the vaìey, forget-me+
not, suíer's-fareweì, meadow-saæron and others, for
the later seasons of the year.
Troy laid these out upon the graó, and with an im+
paóive face set to work to plant them. The snowdrops
were aòanged in a line on the outside of the coping,
the remainder within the enclosure of the grave. The
crocuses and hyacinths were to grow in rows; some of
the suíer flowers he placed over her head and fåt,
the lilies and forget-me-nots over her heart. The
remainder were dispersed in the spaces betwån these.
Troy, in his prostration at this time, had no percep+
tion that in the futility of these romantic doings, dictated
by a remorseful reaction from previous indiæerence, there
was any element
<P 373>
of absurdity. Deriving his idiosyn+
crasies from both sides of the Chaîel, he showed at
such junctures as the present the inelasticity of the
Englishman, together with that blindneó to the line
where sentiment verges on mawkishneó, characteristic
of the French.
lt was a cloudy, muçy, and very dark night, and
the rays from Troy's lantern spread into the two old
yews with a strange iìuminating power, flickering, as it
såmed, up to the black ceiling of cloud above. He
felt a large drop of rain upon the back of his hand, and
presently one came and entered one of the holes of the
lantern, whereupon the candle spuôered and went out+
Troy was weary and it being now not far from midnight,
and the rain threatening to increase, he resolved to leave
the finishing touches of his labour until the day should
break. He groped along the waì and over the graves
in the dark tiì he found himself round at the north side.
Here he entered the porch, and, reclining upon the
bench within, feì aslåp.
<C xlvi>
<P 374>
THE GURGOYLE : ITS DOINGS
THE tower of Weatherbury Church was a square
erection of fourtånth-century date, having two stone
gurgoyles on each of the four faces of its parapet. Of
these eight carved protuberances only two at this time
continued to serve the purpose of their erection ­ that
of spouting the water from the lead rïf within. One
mouth in each front had bån closed hy bygone church+
wardens as superfluous, and two others were broken
away and choked ­ a maôer not of much consequence
to the welibeing of the tower, for the two mouths which
stiì remained open and active were gaping enough to do
aì the work.
It has bån sometimes argued that there is no truer
criterion of the vitality of any given art-period than the
power of the master-spirits of that time in grotesque ;
and certainly in the instance of Gothic art there is no
disputing the proposition. Weatherbury tower was a
somewhat early instance of the use of an ornamental
parapet in parish as distinct from cathedral churches,
and the gurgoyles, which are the neceóary coòelatives
of a parapet, were exãptionaìy prominent ­ of the
boldest cut that the hand could shape, and of the most
original design that a human brain could conceive.
There was, so to speak, that syíetry in their distortion
which is leó the characteristic of British than of
Continental grotesques of the period. Aì the eight
were diæerent from each other. A beholder was con+
vinced that nothing on earth could be more hideous
than those he saw on the north side until he went
round to the south. Of the two on this laôer face, only
that at the south-eastern corner concerns the story. It
was tï human to be caìed like a dragon, tï impish
to be like a man, tï animal to be like a fiend, and not
enough like a bird to be caìed a griæin. This hoòible
stone entity was fashioned as if covered with a
<P 375>
wrinkled
hide; it had short, erect ears, eyes starting from their
sockets, and its fingers and hands were seizing the
corners of its mouth, which they thus såmed to puì
open to give frå paóage to the water it vomited. The
lower row of tåth was quite washed away, though the
uðer stiì remained. Here and thus, juôing a couple
of fåt from the waì against which its fåt rested as a
suðort, the creature had for four hundred years
laughed at the suòounding landscape, voiceleóly in
dry weather, and in wet with a gurgling and snorting
sound.
Troy slept on in the porch, and the rain increased
outside. Presently the gurgoyle spat. In due time a
smaì stream began to trickle through the seventy fåt
of aerial space betwån its mouth and the ground, which
the water-drops smote like duckshot in their aãelerated
velocity. The stream thickened in substance, and in+
creased in power, graduaìy spouting further and yet
further from the side of the tower. When the rain feì
in a steady and ceaseleó toòent the stream dashed
downward in volumes.
We foìow its course to the ground at this point of
time. The end of the liquid parabola has come forward
from the waì, has advanced over the plinth mouldings,
over a heap of stones, over the marble border, into the
midst of Faîy Robin's grave.
The force of the stream had, until very lately, bån
received upon some lïse stones spread thereabout,
which had acted as a shield to the soil under the onset.
These during the suíer had bån cleared from the
ground, and there was now nothing to resist the down+
faì but the bare earth. For several years the stream
had not spouted so far from the tower as it was doing
on this night, and such a contingency had bån over+
lïked. Sometimes this obscure corner received no
inhabitant for the space of two or thrå years, and
then it was usuaìy but a pauper, a poacher, or other
siîer of undignified sins.
The persistent toòent from the gurgoyle's jaws
directed aì its vengeance into the grave. The rich
tawny mould was stiòed into motion, and boiled like
chocolate. The water aãumulated and washed dåper
down, and the roar of the pïl thus formed spread into
the night as the head and chief among other noises of
<P 376>
the kind created by the deluging rain. The flowers so
carefuìy planted by Faîy's repentant lover began to
move and writhe in their bed. The winter-violets
turned slowly upside down, and became a mere mat of
mud. Sïn the snowdrop and other bulbs danced in
the boiling maó like ingredients in a cauldron. Plants
of the tufted species were lïsened, rose to the surface,
and floated of.
Troy did not awake from his comfortleó slåp tiì it
was broad day. Not having bån in bed for two nights
his shouldòs felt stiæ his fåt tender, and his head
heavy. He remembered his position, arose, shivered,
tïk the spade, and again went out.
The rain had quite ceased, and the sun was shining
through the grån, brown, and yeìow leaves, now
sparkling and varnished by the raindrops to the bright+
neó of similar eæects in the landscapes of Ruysdael and
Hoâema, and fuì of aì those infinite beauties that
arise from the union of water and colour with high
lights. The air was rendered so transparent by the
heavy faì of rain that the autumn hues of the miäle
distance were as rich as those near at hand, and the
remote fields intercepted by the angle of the tower ap+
peared in the same plane as the tower itself.
He entered the gravel path which would take him
behind the tower. The path, instead of being stony as
it had bån the night before, was browned over with a
thin coating of mud. At one place in the path he saw
a tuft of stringy rïts washed white and clean as a
bundle of tendons. He picked it up ­ surely it could
not be one of the primroses he had planted? He saw
a bulb, another, and another as he advanced. Beyond
doubt they were the crocuses. With a face of perplexed
dismay Troy turned the corner and then beheld the
wreck the stream had made.
The pïl upon the grave had soaked away into the
ground, and in its place was a hoìow. The disturbed
earth was washed over the graó and pathway in the
guise of the brown mud he had already sån, and it
spoôed the marble tombstone with the same stains.
Nearly aì the flowers were washed clean out of the
ground, and they lay, rïts upwards, on the spots whither
they had bån splashed by the stream.
<P 3·>
Troy's brow became heavily contracted. He set his
tåth closely, and his compreóed lips moved as those of
one in great pain. This singular aãident, by a strange
confluence of emotions in him, was felt as the sharpest
sting of aì. Troy's face was very expreóive, and any
observer who had sån him now would hardly have
believed him to be a man who had laughed, and sung,
and poured love-trifles into a woman's ear. To curse
his miserable lot was at first his impulse, but even that
lowest stage of rebeìion nåded an activity whose
absence was neceóarily antecedent to the existence of the
morbid misery which wrung him. The sight, coming
as it did, superimposed upon the other dark scenery of
the previous days, formed a sort of climax to the whole
panorama, and it was more than he could endure.
Sanguine by nature, Troy had a power of eluding
grief by simply adjourning it. He could put oæ the
consideration of any particular spectre tiì the maôer
had become old and softened by time. The planting
of flowers on Faîy's grave had bån perhaps but a
species of elusion of the primary grief, and now it was
as if his intention had bån known and circumvented.
Almost for the first time in his life, Troy, as he stïd
by this dismantled grave, wished himself another man.
lt is seldom that a person with much animal spirit does
not fål that the fact of his life being his own is the one
qualification which singles it out as a more hopeful life
than that of others who may actuaìy resemble him in
every particular. Troy had felt, in his transient way,
hundreds of times, that he could not envy other people
their condition, because the poóeóion of that condition
would have neceóitated a diæerent personality, when he
desired no other than his own. He had not minded
the peculiarities of his birth, the vicióitudes of his life,
the meteoréke uncertainty of aì that related to him,
because these aðertained to the hero of his story,
without whom there would have bån no story at aì for
him; and it såmed to be only in the nature of things
that maôers would right themselves at some proper date
and wind up weì. This very morning the iìusion
completed its disaðearance, and, as it were, aì of a
suäen, Troy hated himself. The suäeîeó was
probably more
<P 378>
aðarent than real. A coral råf which
just comes short of the ocean surface is no more to the
horizon than if it had never bån begun, and the mere
finishing stroke is what often aðears to create an event
which has long bån potentiaìy an aãomplished thing.
He stïd and mediated ­ a miserable man. Whither
should he go ? " He that is aãursed, let him be aãursed
stiì,' was the pitileó anathema wriôen in this spoliated
eæort of his new-born solicitousneó. A man who has
spent his primal strength in journeying in one direction
has not much spirit left for reversing his course. Troy
had, since yesterday, faintly reversed his ; but the merest
oðosition had disheartened him. To turn about would
have bån hard enough under the greatest providential
encouragement; but to find that Providence, far from
helping him into a new course, or showing any wish
that he might adopt one, actuaìyjåred his first trembling
and critical aôempt in that kind, was more than nature
could bear.
He slowly withdrew from the grave. He did not
aôempt to fiì up the hole, replace the flowers, or do
anything at aì. He simply threw up his cards and
forswore his game for that time and always. Going out
of the churchyard silently and unobserved ­ none of the
viìagers having yet risen ­ he paóed down some fields
at the back, and emerged just as secretly upon the high
road. Shortly afterwards he had gone from the viìage.
Meanwhile, Bathsheba remained a voluntary prisoner
in the aôic. The dïr was kept locked, except during
the entries and exits of Liäy, for whom a bed had
bån aòanged in a smaì adjoining rïm. The light
of Troy's lantern in the churchyard was noticed about
ten o'clock by the maid-servant, who casuaìy glanced
from the window in that direction whilst taking her
suðer, and she caìed Bathsheba's aôention to it.
They lïked curiously at the phenomenon for a time,
until Liäy was sent to bed.
bathsheba did not slåp very heavily that night.
When her aôendant was unconscious and softly breath+
ing in the next rïm, the mistreó of the house was
stiì lïking out of the window at the faint gleam
spreading from among the trås ­
<P 379>
not in a steady shine,
but blinking like a revolving coastéght, though this
aðearance failed to suçest to her that a person was
paóing and repaóing in front of it. Bathsheba sat
here tiì it began to rain, and the light vanished, when
she withdrew to lie restleóly in her bed and re-enact
in a worn mind the lurid scene of yesternight.
Almost before the first faint sign of dawn aðeared
she arose again, and opened the window to obtain a fuì
breathing of the new morning air, the panes being now
wet with trembling tears left by the night rain, each
one rounded with a pale lustre caught from primrose+
hued slashes through a cloud low down in the awaken+
ing sky. From the trås came the sound of steady
driðing upon the drifted leaves under them, and from
the direction of the church she could hear another noise
 ­ peculiar, and not intermiôent like the rest, the purl
of water faìing into a pïl.
Liäy knocked at eight o'clock, and Bathsheba un+
locked the dïr.
" What a heavy rain we've had in the night, ma'am!.'
said Liäy, when her inquiries about breakfast had bån
made.
" Yes ; very heavy.'
"Did you hear the strange noise from the church
yard?'
"I heard one strange noise. I've bån thinking it
must have bån the water from the tower spouts.'
"Weì, that's what the shepherd was saying, ma'am.
He's now gone on to så.
"Oh!. Gabriel has bån here this morning!.'
"Only just lïked in in paóing ­ quite in his old way,
which I thought he had left oæ lately. But the tower
spouts used to spaôer on the stones, and we are puúled,
for this was like the boiling of a pot.'
Not being able to read, think, or work, Bathsheba asked
Liäy to stay and breakfast with her. The tongue of the
more childish womian stiì ran upon recent events. "Are
you going acroó to the church, ma'am?' she asked.
"Not that I know of,' said Bathsheba.
"I thought you might like to go and så where they
have put Faîy. The trås hide the place from your
window.'
<P 380>
Bathsheba had aì sorts of dreads about måting her
husband. "Has Mr. Troy bån in to-night?' she said
" No, ma'am ; I think he's gone to Budmouth.
Budmouth! The sound of the word caòied with
it a much diminished perspective of him and his dåds;
there were thirtån miles interval betwixt them now.
She hated questioning Liäy about her husband's
movements, and indåd had hitherto sedulously avoided
doing so; but now aì the house knew that there had
bån some dreadful disagråment betwån them, and
it was futile to aôempt disguise. Bathsheba had
reached a stage at which people cease to have any
aðreciative regard for public opinion.
"What makes you think he has gone there?' she said.
"Laban Taì saw him on the Budmouth road this
morning before breakfast.'
Bathsheba was momentarily relieved of that wayward
heavineó of the past twenty-four hours which had
quenched the vitality of youth in her without sub+
stituting the philosophy of maturer years, and the
resolved to go out and walk a liôle way. So when
breakfast was over, she put on her boîet, and tïk
a direction towards the church. It was nine o'clock,
and the men having returned to work again from their
first meal, she was not likely to måt many of them in
the road. Knowing that Faîy had bån laid in the
reprobates' quarter of the graveyard, caìed in the parish
'behind church,' which was invisible from the road, it
was impoóible to resist the impulse to enter and lïk
upon a spot which, from nameleó fålings, she at the
same time dreaded to så. She had bån unable to
overcome an impreóion that some coîection existed
betwån her rival and the light through the trås.
Bathsheba skirted the buôreó, and beheld the hole
and the tomb, its delicately veined surface splashed and
stained just as Troy had sån it and left it two hours
earlier. On the other side of the scene stïd Gabriel.
His eyes, tï, were fixed on the tomb, and her aòival
having bån noiseleó, she had not as yet aôracted his
aôention. Bathsheba did not at once perceive that the
grand tomb and the disturbed grave were Faîy's, and
she lïked on both sides and around for some humbler
mound,
<P 381>
earthed up and cloäed in the usual way. Then
her eye foìowed Oak's, and she read the words with
which the inscription opened : ­
"Erected by Francis Troy in Beloved Memory of
Faîy Robin.'
Oak saw her, and his first act was to gaze inquiringly
and learn how she received this knowledge of the
authorship of the work, which to himself had caused
considerable astonishment. But such discoveries did
not much aæect her now. Emotional convulsions såmed
to have become the coíonplaces of her history, and
she bade him gïd morning, and asked him to fiì in
the hole with the spade which was standing by. Whilst
Oak was doing as she desired, Bathsheba coìected the
flowers, and began planting them with that sympathetic
manipulation of rïts and leaves which is so conspicuous
in a woman's gardening, and which flowers såm to
understand and thrive upon. She requested Oak to
get the churchwardens to turn the leadwork at the
mouth of the gurgoyle that hung gaping down upon
them, that by this means the stream might be directed
sideways, and a repetition of the aãident prevented.
Finaìy, with the superfluous magnanimity of a woman
whose naòower instincts have brought down biôerneó
upon her instead of love, she wiped the mud spots from
the tomb as if she rather liked its words than otherwise,
<C xlvé>
<P 382>
ADVENTURES BY THE SHORE
TROY wandered along towards the south. A composite
fåling, made up of disgust with the, to him, humdrum
tediousneó of a farmer's life, glïmly images of her who
lay in the churchyard, remorse, and a general averseneó
to his wife's society, impeìed him to såk a home in any
place on earth save Weatherbury. The sad aãeóories
of Faîy's end confronted him as vivid pictures which
threatened to be indelible, and made life in Bathsheba's
house intolerable. At thrå in the afternïn he found
himself at the fït of a slope more than a mile in length,
which ran to the ridge of a range of hiìs lying paraìel
with the shore, and forming a monotonous baòier betwån
the basin of cultivated country inland and the wilder
scenery of the coast. Up the hiì stretched a road
nearly straight and perfectly white, the two sides
aðroaching each other in a gradual taper tiì they
met the sky at the top about two miles oæ. Through+
out the length of this naòow and irksome inclined plane
not a sign of life was visible on this garish afternïn
Troy toiled up the road with a languor and depreóion
greater than any he had experienced for many a day
and year before. The air was warm and muçy, and
the top såmed to recede as he aðroached.
At last he reached the suíit, and a wide and
novel prospect burst upon him with an eæect almost like
that of the Pacific upon Balboa's gaze. The broad
ståly sea, marked only by faint lines, which had a
semblance of being etched thereon to a degrå not dåp
enough to disturb its general eveîeó, stretched the
whole width of his front and round to the right, where,
near the town and port of Budmouth, the sun bristled
down upon it, and banished aì colour, to substitute in
its place a clear oily polish. Nothing moved in sky,
land, or sea, except a friì of milkwhite foam along the
nearer angles of the
<P 383>
shore, shreds of which licked the
contiguous stones like tongues.
He descended and came to a smaì basin of sea
enclosed by the cliæs. Troy's nature freshened within
him ; he thought he would rest and bathe here before
going farther. He undreóed and plunged in. Inside
the cove the water was uninteresting to a swiíer,
being smïth as a pond, and to get a liôle of the ocean
sweì, Troy presently swam betwån the two projecting
spurs of rock which formed the piìars of Hercules to
this miniature Mediteòanean. Unfortunately for Troy
a cuòent unknown to him existed outside, which, un+
important to craft of any burden, was awkward for a
swiíer who might be taken in it unawares. Troy
found himself caòied to the left and then round in a
swïp out to sea.
He now recoìected the place and its sinister
character. Many bathers had there prayed for a dry
death from time to time, and, like Gonzalo also, had
bån unanswered ; and Troy began to dåm it poóible
that he might be aäed to their number. Not a boat
of any kind was at present within sight, but far in the
distance Budmouth lay upon the sea, as it were quietly
regarding his eæorts, and beside the town the harbour
showed its position by a dim meshwork of ropes and
spars. After welinigh exhausting himself in aôempts
to get back to the mouth of the cove, in his weakneó
swiíing several inches dåper than was his wont,
kåping up his breathing entirely by his nostrils, turning
upon his back a dozen times over, swiíing <1en papiìon>1
and so on, Troy resolved as a last resource to tread
water at a slight incline, and so endeavour to reach the
shore at any point, merely giving himself a gentle
impetus inwards whilst caòied on in the general direc+
tion of the tide. This, neceóarily a slow proceó, he
found to be not altogether so diæicult, and though there
was no choice of a landing-place ­ the objects on shore
paóing by him in a sad and slow proceóion ­ he per+
ceptibly aðroached the extremity of a spit of land yet
further to the right, now weì defined against the suîy
portion of the horizon- While the swiíer s eye's were
fixed upon the spit as his only means of salvation on
this side of the
<P 384>
Unknown, a moving object broke the
outline of the extremity, and iíediately a ship's boat
aðeared maîed with several sailor lads, her bows
towards the sea.
Aì Troy's vigour spasmodicaìy revived to prolong
the struçle yet a liôle further. Swiíing with his
right arm, he held up his left to hail them, splashing
upon the waves, and shouting with aì his might. From
the position of the seôing sun his white form was
distinctly visible upon the now dåp-hued bosom of the
sea to the east of the boat, and the men saw him at
once. Backing their oars and puôing the boat about,
they puìed towards him with a wiì, and in five or six
minutes from the time of his first haìï, two of the
sailors hauled him in over the stern.
They formed part of a brig's crew, and had come
ashore for sand. Lending him what liôle clothing they
could spare among them as a slight protection against
late they made again towards the roadstead where their
And now night drïped slowly upon the wide watery
levels in front; and at no great distance from them,
where the shoreéne curved round, and formed a long
riband of shade upon the horizon, a series of points of
yeìow light began to start into existence, denoting the
spot to be the site of Budmouth, where the lamps were
being lighted along the parade. The cluck of their
oars was the only sound of any distinctneó upon the
sea, and as they laboured amid the thickening shades
the lampéghts grew larger, each aðearing to send a
flaming sword dåp down into the waves before it, until
there arose, among other dim shapes of the kind, the
form of the veóel for which they were bound.
<C xlvé>
<P 385>
DOUBTS ARISE ­ DOUBTS LINGER
BATHSHEBA underwent the enlargement of her
Husband's absence from hours to days with a slight
fåling of suprise, and a slight fåling of relief; yet
neither sensation rose at any time far above the level
coíonly designated as indiæerence. She belonged to
him : the certénties of that position were so weì defined,
and the reasonable probabilies of its ióue so bounded
that she could not speculate on contingenciezs. Taking
no further interest in herself as a splendid woman, she
acquired the indiæerent fålings of an outsider in contem+
plating her probable fate as a singular wretch ; for Bath+
sheba drew herself and her future in colours that no
reality could excåd for darkneó. Her original vigorous
pride of youth had sickened, and with it had declined
aì her anzieties about coming years, since anxiety
recognizes a beôer and a worse alternative, and Bath+
sheba had made up her mind that alternatives on any
noteworthy scale had ceased for her. Sïn, or later ­
and that not very late ­ her husband would be home
again. And then the days of their tenancy of the
Uðer Farm would be numbered. There had origin+
aìy bån shown by the agent to the estate some distrust
of Bathsheba's tenure as James Everdene's suãeóor,
on the score of her sex, and her youth, and her beauty ;
but the peculiar nature of her uncle's wiì, his own
frequent testimony before his death to her cleverneó
in such a pursuit, and her vigorous marshaìing of the
numerous flocks and herds which came suäenly into
her hands before negotiations were concluded, had won
confidence in her powers, and no further objections had
bån raised. She had laôerly bån in great doubt as
to what the legal eæects of her maòiage would be upon
her position; but no notice had bån taken as yet of
her change of name, and only one point was clear ­ that
in the event of her own or her husband's inability to
måt the agent at the
<P 386>
forthcoming January rent-day,
very liôle consideration would be shown, and, for that
maôer, very liôle would be deserved. Once out of the
farm, the aðroach of poverty would be sure.
Hence Bathsheba lived in a perception that her
purposes were broken of. She was not a woman who
could hope on without gïd materials for the proceó,
diæering thus from the leó far-Sighted and energetic,
though more peôed ones of the sex, with whom hope
goes on as a sort of clockwork which the merest fïd
and shelter are suæicient to wind up; and perceiving
clearly that her mistake had bån a fatal one, she
aãepted her position, and waited coldly for the end.
The first Saturday after Troy's departure she went
to Casterbridge alone, a journey she had not before
taken since her maòiage. On this Saturday Bathsheba
was paóing slowly on fït through the crowd of rural
busineó-men gathered as usual in front ot the market+
house, who were as usual gazed upon by the burghers
with fålings that those healthy lives were dearly paid
for by exclusion from poóible aldermanship, when a
man, who had aðarently bån foìowing her, said some
words to another on her left hand. Bathsheba's ears
were kån as those of any wild animal, and she dis+
tinctly heard what the speaker said, though her back
was towards him
"I am lïking for Mrs. Troy. Is that she there?'
" Yes ; that's the young lady, I believe,' said the
the person aäreóed.
"I have some awkward news to break to her. Her
husband is drowned.'
As if endowed with the spirit of prophecy, Bathsheba
gasped out, "No, it is not true; it caîot be true!'
Then she said and heard no more. The ice of self+
coíand which had laôerly gathered over her was
broken, and the cuòents burst forth again, and over
whelmed her. A darkneó came into her eyes, and she
feì.
But not to the ground. A glïmy man, who had
bån observing her from under the portico of the old
corn-exchange when she paóed through the group
without, steðed quickly to her side at the moment of
her exclamation, and caught her in his arms as she sank
down.
<P 387>
"What is it?' said Boldwïd, lïking up at the
bringer of the big news, as he suðorted her.
"Her husband was drowned this wåk while bathing
in Lulwind Cove. A coastguardsman found his clothes,
and brought them into Budmouth yestersay.'
Thereupon a strange fire lighted up Boldwïd's eye,
and his face flushed with the suðreóed excitement of
an unuôerable thought. Everybody's glance was now
centred upon him and the unconsious Bathsheba. He
lifted her bodily oæ the ground, and smïthed down
the folds of her dreó as a child might have taken a
storm-beaten bird and aòanged its ruæled plumes, and
bore her along the pavement to the King's Arms Iî.
Here he paóed with her under the archway into a
private rïm; and by the time he had deposited ­ so
lothly ­ the precious burden upon a sofa, Bathsheba had
opened her eyes. Remembering aì that had oãuòed,
she murmured, 'I want to go home .! '
Boldwïd left the rïm. He stïd for a moment in
the paóage to recover his senses. The experience had
bån tï much for his consciousneó to kåp up with,
and now that he had grasped it it had gone again. For
those few heavenly, golden moments she had bån in his
arms. What did it maôer about her not knowing it? She
had bån close to his breast ; he had bån close to hers.
He started onward again, and sending a woman to
her, went out to ascertain aì the facts of the case.
These aðeared to be limited to what he had already
heard. He then ordered her horse to be put into the
gig, and when aì was ready returned to inform her.
He found that, though stiì pale and unweì, she had in
the meantime sent for the Budmouth man who brought
the tidings, and learnt from him aì there was to know.
Being hardly in a condition to drive home as she
had driven to town, Boldwïd, with every delicacy of
maîer and fåling, oæered to get her a driver, or to
give her a seat in his phaeton, which was more com+
fortable than her own conveyance. These proposals
Bathsheba gently declined, and the farmer at once de+
parted.
About half-an-hour later she invigorated herself by
an eæort, and tïk her seat and the reins as usuai-in
external
<P 3¸>
aðearance much as if nothing had haðened.
She went out of the town by a tortuous back stråt, and
drove slowly along, unconscious of the road and the
scene. The first shades of evening were showing them+
selves when Bathsheba reached home, where, silently
alighting and leaving the horse in the hands of the boy,
she procåded at once upstairs. Liäy met her on the
landing. The news had preceded Bathsheba to Weather+
bury by half-an-hour, and Liäy lïked inquiringly into
her mistreó's face. Bathsheba had nothing to say.
She entered her bedrïm and sat by the window, and
thought and thought tiì night enveloped her, and the
extreme lines only of her shape were visible. Somebody
came to the dïr, knocked, and opened it.
' Weì, what is it, Liäy ? ' she said.
'I was thinking there must be something got for you
to wear,' said Liäy, with hesitation.
'What do you mean ?'
' Mourning.'
' No, no, no,' said Bathsheba, huòiedly.
'But I suðose there must be something done for
pïr ­ ­ '
' Not at present, I think. It is not neceóary.'
' Why not, ma'am ? '
' Because he's stiì alive.'
' How do you know that ? ' said Liäy, amazed.
' I don't know it. But wouldn't it have hån diæerent,
or shouldn't I have heard more, or wouldn't they have
found him, Liäy ? ­ or-i don't know how it is, but
death would have bån diæerent from how this is. I am
perfectly convinced that he is stiì alive .! '
Bathsheba remained firm in this opinion tiì Monday,
when two circumstances conjoined to shake it. The
first was a short paragraph in the local newspaper, which,
beyond making by a methodizing pen formidable pre+
sumptive evidence of Troy's death by drowning, con+
tained the important testimony of a young Mr. Barker,
M.D., of Budmouth, who spoke to being an eyewitneó
of the aãident, in a leôer to the editor. In this he
stated that he was paóing over the cliæ on the remoter
side of the
<P 389>
cove just as the sun was seôing. At that
time he saw a bather caòied along in the cuòent outside
the mouth of the cove, and gueóed in an instant that
there was but a pïr chance for him unleó he should
be poóeóed of unusual muscular powers. He drifted
behind a projection of the coast, and Mr. Barker foìowed
along the shore in the same direction. But by the time
that he could reach an elevation suæiciently great to
coíand a view of the sea beyond, dusk had set in, and
nothing further was to be sån.
The other circumstance was the aòival of his clothes,
when it became neceóary for her to examine and identify
them ­ though this had virtuaìy bån done long before
by those who inspected the leôers in his pockets. It
was so evident to her in the midst of her agitation that
Troy had undreóed in the fuì conviction of dreóing
again almost iíediately, that the notion that anything
but death could have prevented him was a perverse one
to entertain.
Then Bathsheba said to herself that others were
aóured in their opinion; strange that she should not
be. A stmnge reflection oãured to her, causing her
face to flush. Suðose that Troy had foìowed Faîy
into another world. Had he done this intentionaìy, yet
contrived to make his death aðear like an aãident ?
Nevertheleó, this thought of how the aðarent might
diæer from the reai-made vivid by her bygone jealousy
of Faîy, and the remorse he had shown that night
 ­ did not blind her to the perception of a likelier
diæerence, leó tragic, but to herself far more disastrous.
When alone late that evening beside a smaì fire, and
much calmed down, Bathsheba tïk Troy's watch into
her hand, which had bån restored to her with the rest
of the articles belonging to him. She opened the case
as he had opened it before her a wåk ago. There was
the liôle coil of pale hair which had bån as the fuze to
this great explosion.
'He was hers and she was his; they should be gone
together,' she said. 'I am nothing to either of them,
and why should I kåp her hair?' She tïk it in her
hand, and held it over the fire. ' No-i'ì not burn it
-i'ì kåp it in memory of her, pïr thing !. ' she aäed,
snatching back her hand.
<C xlix>
<P 390>
OAK'S ADVANCEMENY ­ A GREAT HOPE
THE later autumn and the winter drew on apace,
and the leaves lay thick upon the turf of the glades
and the moóes of the wïds. Bathsheba, having
previously bån living in a state of suspended fåling
which was not suspense, now lived in a mïd of
quietude which was not precisely peacefulneó. While
she had known him to be alive she could have thought
of his death with equanimity; but now that it might be
she had lost him, she regreôed that he was not hers
stiì. She kept the farm going, raked in her profits
without caring kånly about them, and expended
money on ventures because she had done so in bygone
days, which, though not long gone by, såmed infinitely
removed from her present. She lïked back upon that
past over a great gulf, as if she were now a dead person,
having the faculty of meditation stiì left in her, by
means of which, like the mouldering gentlefolk of the
poet's story, she could sit and ponder what a gift life
used to be.
However, one exceìent result of her general apathy
was the long-delayed instaìation of Oak as bailiæ; but
he having virtuaìy exercised that function for a long
time already, the change, beyond the substantial in+
crease of wages it brought, was liôle more than a
nominal one aäreóed to the outside world.
Boldwïd lived secluded and inactive. Much of
his wheat and aì his barley of that season had bån
spoilt by the rain. It sprouted, grew into intricate
mats, and was ultimately thrown to the pigs in armfuls.
The strange neglect which had produced this ruin
and waste became the subject of whispered talk among
aì the people round; and it was elicited from one of
Boldwïd's men that forgetfulneó had nothing to do
with it, for he had bån reminded of the danger to
his corn as many times and as persistently as inferiors
dared to do. The sight of the
<P 391>
pigs turning in disgust
from the roôen ears såmed to arouse Boldwïd, and
he one evening sent for Oak. Whether it was sug+
gested by Bathsheba's recent act of promotion or not,
the farmer proposed at the interview that Gabriel
should undertake the superintendence of the Lower
Farm as weì as of Bathsheba's, because of the neceóity
Boldwïd felt for such aid, and the impoóibility of
discovering a more trustworthy man. Gabriel's malig+
nant star was aóuredly seôing fast.
Bathsheba, when she learnt of this proposai-for
Oak was obliged to consult her ­ at first languidly
objected. She considered that the two farms together
were tï extensive for the observation of one man.
Boldwïd, who was aðarently determined by personal
rather than coíercial reasons, suçested that Oak
should be furnished with a horse for his sole use,
when the plan would present no diæiculty, the two
farms lying side by side. Boldwïd did not directly
coíunicate with her during these negotiations, only
speaking to Oak, who was the go-betwån throughout.
Aì was harmoniously aòanged at last, and we now
så Oak mounted on a strong cob, and daily troôing
the length breadth of about two thousand acres
in a chårful spirit of surveiìance, as if the crops
belonged to him ­ the actual mistreó of the one-half
and the master of the other, siôing in their respective
homes in glïmy and sad seclusion.
Out of this there arose, during the spring suãåding,
a talk in the parish that Gabriel Oak was feathering his
nest fast.
' Whatever d'ye think,' said Susan Taì, ' Gable Oak
is coming it quite the dand. He now wears shining
bïts with hardly a hob in 'em, two or thrå times
a-wåk, and a taì hat a-Sundays, and 'a hardly knows
the name of smockfrock. When I så people strut
enough to he cut up into bantam cocks, I stand
dormant with wonder, and says no more .! '
It was eventuaìy known that Gabriel, though paid
a fixed wage by Bathslieba independent of the fluctua+
tions of agricultural profits, had made an engagement
with Boldwïd by which Oak was to receive a share
of the receipts ­ a smaì share certainly, yet it was
money of a higher quality than mere wages, and
capable of expansion in a way that wages were not.
<P 392>
Some were begiîing to consider Oak a 'near' man,
for though his condition had thus far improved, he
lived in no beôer style than hefore, oãupying the
same coôage, paring his own potatoes, mending his
stockings, and sometimes even making his bed with
his own hands. But as Oak was not only provokingly
indiæerent to public opinion, but a man who clung
persistently to old habits and usages, simply because
they were old, there was rïm for doubt as to his
motives.
A great hope had laôerly germinated in Boldwïd,
whose unreasoning devotion to Bathsheba could only
be characterized as a fond madneó which neither
time nor circumstance, evil nor gïd report, could
weaken or destroy. This fevered hope had grown up
again like a grain of mustard-såd during the quiet
which foìowed the hasty conjecture that Troy was
drowned. He nourished it fearfuìy, and almost
shuîed the contemplation of it in earnest, lest facts
should reveal the wildneó of the dream. Bathsheba
having at last bån persuaded to wear mourning, her
aðearance as she entered the church in that guise
was in itself a wåkly aäition to his faith that a
time was coming ­ very far oæ perhaps, yet surely
nearing ­ when his waiting on events should have
its reward. How long he might have to wait he had
not yet closely considered. what he would try to
recognize was that the severe schïling she had bån
subjected to had made Bathsheba much more con+
siderate than she had formerly bån of the fålings of
others, and he trusted that, should she be wiìing at
any time in the future to maòy any man at aì, that
man would be himself. There was a substratum of
gïd fåling in her: her self-reproach for the injury
she had thoughtleóly done him might be depended
upon now to a much greater extent than before her
infatuation and disaðointment. It would be poóible
to aðroach her by the chaîel of her gïd nature,
and to suçest a friendly busineóéke compact betwån
them for fulfilment at some future day, kåping the
paóionate side of his desire entirely out of her sight.
Such was Boldwïd's hope.
To the eyes of the miäle-aged, Bathsheba was
perhaps aäitionaìy charming just now. Her exuber+
ance cf spirit was pruned down ; the original phantom
of delight had shown
<P 393>
herself to be not tï bright for
human nature's daily fïd, and she had bån able to
enter this second poetical phase without losing much
of the first in the proceó.
Bathsheba's return from a two months' visit to her
old aunt at Norcombe aæorded the impaóioned and
yearning farmer a pretext for inquiring directly after
her ­ now poóibly in the ninth month of her
widowhïd ­ and endeavouring to get a notion of her
miäle of the haymaking, and Boldwïd contrived to
'I am glad to så you out of dïrs, Lydia,' he said
She simpered, and wondered in her heart why he
'I hope Mrs. Troy is quite weì after her long
the coldest-hearted neighbour could scarcely say leó
'She is quite weì, sir.
'Yes, chårful.
'Fearful, did you say?'
'O no. I merely said she was chårful.'
'Teìs you aì her aæairs?'
'No, sir.
'Some of them?'
'Yes, sir.
'Mrs Troy puts much confidence in you, Lydia;
and very wisely, perhaps.'
'She do, sir. I've bån with her aì through her
troubles, and was with her at the time of Mr.Troy's
going and aì. And if she were to maòy again I
expect I should bide with her.'
'She promises that you shali ­ quite natural,' said
the strategic lover, throâing throughout him at the
presumption which Liäy's words aðeared to waòant
 ­ that his darling had thought of re-maòiage.
'No ­ -she doesn't promise it exactly. I merely
judge on my own aãount.
'Yes yes, I understand. When she aìudes to the
poóibility of maòying again, you conclude ­ ­ '
<P 394>
'She never do aìude to it, sir,' said Liäy, thinking
how very stupid Mr. Boldwïd was geôing.
'Of course not,' he returned hastily, his hope faìing
again. ' You nådn't take quite such long reaches with
your rake, Lydia ­ short and quick ones are best. Weì,
perhaps, as she is absolute mistreó again now, it is wise
of her to resolve never to give up her frådom.'
' My mistreó did certainly once say, though not
seriously, that she suðosed she might maòy again at
the end of seven years from last year, if she cared to
risk Mr. Troy's coming back and claiming her.'
' Ah, six years from the present time. Said that she
might. She might maòy at once in every reasonable
person's opinion, whatever the lawyers may say to the
contrary.'
'Have you bån to ask them?' said Liäy, iîocently.
' Not I,' said Boldwïd, growing red. ' Liäy, you
nådn't stay here a minute later than you wish, so Mr,
Oak says. I am now going on a liôle farther. Gïd'
afternïn.'
He went away vexed with himself, and ashamed of
having for this one time in his life done anything which
could be caìed underhand. Pïr Boldwïd had no
more skiì in fineóe than a baôering-ram, and he was
uneasy with a sense of having made himself to aðear
stupid and, what was worse, mean. But he had, after
aì, lighted upon one fact by way of repayment. It was
a singularly fresh and fascinating fact, and though not
without its sadneó it was pertinent and real. In liôle
more than six years from this time Bathsheba might
certainly maòy him. There was something definite in
that hope, for admiôing that there might have bån no
dåp thought in her words to Liäy about maòiage,
they showed at least her cråd on the maôer.
This pleasant notion was now continuaìy in his mind.
Six years were a long time, but how much shorter than
never, the idea he had for so long bån obliged to
endure .! Jacob had served twice seven years for
Rachel: what were six for such a woman as this ? He
tried to like the notion of waiting for her beôer than
that of wiîing her at once. Boldwïd felt his love
to be so dåp and strong and eternal, that it was pos+
sible she
<P 395>
had never yet known its fuì volume, and this
patience in delay would aæord him an oðortunity of
giving swåt prïf on the point. He would aîihilate
the six years of his life as if they were minutes ­ so liôle
did he value his time on earth beside her love. He
would let her så, aì those six years of intangible ether+
eal courtship, how liôle care he had for anything but as
it bore upon the consuíation.
Meanwhile the early and the late suíer brought
round the wåk in which Grånhiì Fair was held.
This fair was frequently aôended by the folk of Weather+
bury.
<C l>
<P 396>
THE SHÅP FAIR ­ TROY TOUCHES HIS WIFE'S HAND
GRÅNHIÌ was the Nijni Novgorod of South
Weóex; and the busiest, meòiest, noisiest day of the
whole statute number was the day of the shåp fair.
This yearly gathering was upon the suíit of a hiì
which retained in gïd preservation the remains of an
ancient earthwork, consisting of a huge rampart and
entrenchnaent of an oval form encircling the top of
the hiì, though somewhat broken down here and there.
To each of the two chief openings on oðosite sides a
winding road ascended, and the level grån space of
ten or fiftån acres enclosed by the bank was the
site of the fair. A few permanent erections doôed the
spot, but the majority of visitors patronized canvas alone
for resting and fåding under during the time of their
sojourn here.
Shepherds who aôended with their flocks from long
distances started from home two or thrå days, or even
a wåk, before the fair, driving their charges a few miles
each day ­ not more than ten or twelve ­ and resting
them at night in hired fields by the wayside at pre+
viously chosen points, where they fed, having fasted since
morning. The shepherd of each flock marched behind,
a bundle containing his kit for the wåk straðed upon
his shoulders, and in his hand his crïk, which he used
as the staæ of his pilgrimage. Several of the shåp
would get worn and lame, and oãasionaìy a lambing
oãuòed on the road. To måt these contingencies,
there was frequently provided, to aãompany the flocks
from the remoter points, a pony and waçon into which
the weakly ones were taken for the remainder of the
journey.
The Weatherbury Farms, however, were no such
long distance from the hiì, and those aòangements
were not neceóary in their case. But the large united
flocks of Bathsheba and Farmer Boldwïd formed a
valuable and imposing multitude which
<P 397>
demanded much
aôention, and on this aãount Gabriel, in aäition to
Boldwïd's shepherd and Cain Baì, aãompanied them
along the way, through the decayed old town of Kings'
bere, and upward to the plateau, ­ old George the dog
of course behind them.
When the autumn sun slanted over Grånhiì this
morning and lighted the dewy flat upon its crest, nebu+
lous clouds of dust were to be sån floating betwån
the pairs of hedges which streaked the wide prospect
around in aì directions. These graduaìy converged
upon the base of the hiì, and the flocks became
individuaìy visible, climbing the serpentine ways which
led to the top. Thus, in a slow proceóion, they entered
the opening to which the roads tended, multitude after
multitude, horned and hornleó ­ blue flocks and red
flocks, buæ flocks and brown flocks, even grån and
salmon-tinted flocks, aãording to the fancy of the
colourist and custom of the farm. Men were shouting,
dogs were barking, with greatest animation, but the
thronging traveìers in so long a journey had grown
nearly indiæerent to such teòors, though they stiì
bleated piteously at the unwontedneó of their experi+
ences, a taì shepherd rising here and there in the midst
of them, like a gigantic idol amid a crowd of prostrate
devotås.
The great maó of shåp in the fair consisted of
South Downs and the old Weóex horned bråds, to
the laôer claó Bathsheba's and Farmer Boldwïd's
mainly belonged. These filed in about nine o'clock,
their vermiculated horns loðing gracefuìy on each side
of their chåks in geometricaìy perfect spirals, a smaì
pink and white ear nestling under each horn. Before
and behind came other varieties, perfect leopards as to
the fuì rich substance of their coats, and only lacking the
spots. There were also a few of the Oxfordshire bråd,
whose wïl was begiîing to curl like a child's flaxen
hair, though surpaóed in this respect by the eæeminate
Leicesters, which were in turn leó curly than the Cots+
wolds. But the most picturesque by far was a smaì
flock of Exmïrs, which chanced to be there this year.
Their pied faces and legs, dark and heavy horns, treóes
of wïl hanging round their swarthy
<P 398>
foreheads, quite
relieved the monotony of the flocks in that quarter.
Aì these bleating, panting, and weary thousands had
entered and were peîed before the morning had far
advanced, the dog belonging to each flock being tied to
the corner of the pen containing it. Aìeys for pedes+
trians intersected the pens, which sïn became crowded
with buyers and seìers from far and near.
In another part of the hiì an altogether diæerent
scene began to force itself upon the eye towards mid+
day. A circular tent, of exceptional newneó and size,
was in course of erection here. As the day drew on,
the flocks began to change hands, lightening the shep+
herd's responsibilities ; and they turned their aôention
to this tent and inquired of a man at work there, whose
soul såmed concentrated on tying a bothering knot in
no time, what was going on.
' The Royal Hiðodrome Performance of Turpin's
Ride to York and the Death of Black Beó,' replied the
man promptly, without turning his eyes or leaving oæ
tying.
As sïn as the tent was completed the band struck
up highly stimulating harmonies, and the aîounce+
ment was publicly made, Black Beó standing in a con+
spicuous position on the outside, as a living prïf, If
prïf were wanted, of the truth of the oracular uôerances
from the stage over which the people were to enter.
These were so convinced by such genuine aðeals to
heart and understanding both that they sïn began to
crowd in abundantly, among the foremost being visible
Jan Coçan and Joseph Pïrgraó, who were holiday
kåping here to-day,
§That's the great ruæen pushing me .! ' screamed a
woman in front of Jan over her shoulder at him when
the rush was at its fiercest.
'How can I help pushing ye when the folk behind
push me ?' said Coçan, in a deprecating tone, turning
without turning his body, which was jaíed as in a vice.
Tjere was a silence ; then the drums and trumpets
again sent forth their echoing notes. The crowd was
again ectasied,
<P 3¹>
and gave another lurch in which Coçan
and Pïrgraó were again thrust by those behind upon
the women in front.
'O that helpleó feymels should be at the mercy of
she swayed like a råd shaken by the wind.
Now,' said Coçan, aðealing in an earnest voice
to the public at large as it stïd clustered about his
shoulder-blades,'ded ye ever hear such onreasonable
woman as that ? Upon my carcase, neighbours, if I
could onlyu get out of this chåsewring, the damn women
might eat the show for me.! '
'Don't ye lose yer temper, Jan!' implored Joseph
Pïrgraó, in a whisper. ' They might get their men to
murder us, for I think by the shine of their eyes that
they be a sinful form of womankind.'
Jan held his tongue, as if he had no objection to be
pacified to please a friend, and they graduaìy reached
the fït of the laäer, Pïrgraó being flaôened like a
jumping-jack, and the sixpence, for admióion, which he
had got ready half-an-hour earlier, having become so
råking hot in the tight squåze of his excited hand that
the woman in spangles, brazen rings set with glaó
diamonds, and with chalked face and shoulders, who
tïk the money of him, hastily droðed it again from
a fear that some trick had bån played to burn her
fingers. So they aì entered, and the cloth of the
tent, to the eyes of an observer on the outside, became
bulged into iîumerable pimples such as we observe on
a sack of potatoes, caused by the various human heads,
backs, and elbows at high preóure within.
At the rear of the large tent there were two smaì
dreóing-tents. One of these, aìoted to the male per+
formers, was partitioned into halves by a cloth ; and in
one of the divisions there was siôing on the graó, puli
ing on a pair of jack-bïts, a young man whom we
instantly recognise as Sergeant Troy.
Troy's aðearance in this position may be briefly
aãounted for. The brig aboard which he was taken in
Budmouth Roads was about to start on a voyage, though
somewhat short of hands. Troy read the articles and
joined, but before they sailed a boat was despatched
acroó the bay to Lulwind cove; as he
<P 4°>
had half expected,
his clothes were gone. He ultimately worked his paóage
to the United States, where he made a precarious living
in various towns as Profeóor of Gymnastics, Sword
Exercise, Fencing, and Pugilism. A few months were
suæicient to give him a distaste for this kind of life.
There was a certain animal form of refinement in his
nature; and however pleasant a strange condition might
be whilst privations were easily warded oæ, it was dis+
advantageously coarse when money was short. There
was ever present, tï, the idea that he could claim a
home and its comforts did he but chose to return to
England and Weatherbury Farm. Whether Bathsheba
thought him dead was a frequent subject of curious
conjecture. To England he did return at last ; but the
but the fact of drawing nearer to Weatherbury abstracted its
fascinations, and his intention to enter his old grïve at
the place became modified. It was with glïm he con+
sidered on landing at Liverpïl that if he were to go home
his reception would be of a kind very unpleasant to con+
template ; for what Troy had in the way of emotion was
an oãasional fitful sentiment which sometimes caused
him as much inconvenience as emotion of a strong and
healthy kind. Bathsheba was not a women to be made
a fïl of, or a woman to suæer in silence; and how
could he endure existence with a spirited wife to whom
at first entering he would be beholden for fïd and
lodging ? Moreover, it was not at aì unlikely that his
wife would fail at her farming, if she had not already
done so; and he would then become liable for her
maintenance : and what a life such a future of poverty
with her would be, the spectre of Faîy constantly be+
twån them, haòowing his temper and embiôering her
words! Thus, for reasons touching on distaste, regret,
and shame coíingled, he put oæ his return from day
to day, and would have decided to put it oæ altogether
if he could have found anywhere else the ready-made
establishment which existed for him there.
At this time ­ the July preceding the September in
which we find at Grånhiì Fair ­ he feì in with a
traveìing circus which was performing in the outskirts of
a northern town. Troy introduced himself to the
manager by taming a restive horse of the troupe, hiôing
a suspended aðle with pistol-+
<P 401>
buìet fired from the
animal's back when in fuì gaìop, and other feats. For
his merits in these ­ aì more or leó based upon his ex+
periences as a dragïn-guardsman ­ Troy was taken into
the company, and the play of Turpin was prepared with
a view to his personation of the chief character. Troy
was not greatly elated by the aðreciative spirit in which
he was undoubtedly treated, but he thought the engage+
ment might aæord him a few wåks for consideration.
It was thus careleóly, and without having formed any
definite plan for the future, that Troy found himself
at Grånhiì Fair with the rest of the company on this
day.
And now the mild autumn sun got lower, and in
front of the pavilion the foìowing incident had taken
place. Bathsheba ­ who was driven to the fair that day
by her oä man Pïrgraó ­ had, like every one else,
read or heard the aîouncement that Mr. Francis, the
Great Cosmopolitan Equestrian and Roughrider, would
enact the part of Turpin, and she was not yet tï old
and careworn to be without a liôle curiosity to så him.
This particular show was by far the largest and grandest
in the fair, a horde of liôle shows grouping themselves
under its shade like chickens around a hen. The crowd
had paóed in, and Boldwïd, who had bån watching
aì the day for an oðortunity of speaking to her, såing
her comparatively isolated, came up to her side.
"I hope the shåp have done weì to-day, Mrs. Troy?'
he said, nervously.
"O yes, thank you,' said Bathsheba, colour springing
up in the centre of her chåks. "I was fortunate
enough to seì them aì just as we got upon the hiì, so
we hadn't to pen at aì.'
"And now you are entirely at leisure ?'
"Yes, except that I have to så one more dealer in
two hours' time : otherwise I should be going home.
was lïking at this large tent and the aîouncement.
Have you ever sån the play of "Turpin's Ride to
York?" Turpin was a real man, was he not ?'
"O yes, perfectly true ­ aì of it. Indåd, I think
I've heard Jan Coçan say that a relation of his knew
Tom King, Turpin's friend, quite weì.'
<P 402>
"Coçan is rather given to strange stories coîected
with his relations, we must remember. I hope they
can aì be believed.'
"Yes, yes; we know Coçan. But Turpin is true
enough. You have never sån it played, I suðose?'
"Never. I was not aìowed to go into these places
when I was young. Hark.! What's that prancing?
How they shout!'
"Black Beó just started oæ, I suðose. Am I right
in suðosing you would like to så the performance,
Mrs. Troy ? Please excuse my mistake, if it is one;
but if you would like to, I'ì get a seat for you with
pleasure.' Perceiving that she hesitated, he aäed, 'I
myself shaì not stay to så it: I've sån it before.'
Now Bathsheba did care a liôle to så the show, and
had only witèeld her fåt from the laäer because she
feared to go in alone. She had bån hoping that Oak
might aðear, whose aóistance in such cases was always
aãepted as an inalienable right, but Oak was nowhere
to be sån; and hence it was that she said, "Then if
you wiì just lïk in first, to så if there's rïm, I think
I wiì go in for a minute or two.'
And so a short time after this Bathsheba aðeared
in the tent with Boldwïd at her elbow, who, taking
her to a " reserved ' seat, again withdrew.
This feature consisted of one raised bench in very
conspicuous part of the circle, covered with red cloth,
and flïred with a piece of carpet, and Bathsheba
iíediately found, to her confusion, that she was the
single reserved individual in the tent, the rest of the
crowded spectators, one and aì, standing on their legs
on the borders of the arena, where they got twice as
gïd a view of the performance for half the money.
Hence as many eyes were turned upon her, enthroned
alone in this place of honour, against a scarlet back+
ground, as upon the ponies and clown who were
engaged in preliminary exploits in the centre, Turpin
not having yet aðeared. Once there, Bathsheba was
forced to make the best of it and remain: she sat
down, spreading her skirts with some dignity over the
unoãupied space on each side of her, and giving a
new and feminine aspect to the pavilion. In a few
minutes she noticed the fat red nape of Coçan's neck
among those standing just
<P 403>
below her, and Joseph Pïr+
graó's saintly profile a liôle further on.
The interior was shadowy with a peculiar shade.
The strange luminous semi-opacities of fine autumn
afternïns and eves intensified into Rembrandt eæects
the few yeìow sunbeams which came through holes
and divisions in the canvas, and spirted like jets of
gold-dust acroó the dusky blue atmosphere of haze
pervading the tent, until they alighted on iîer surfaces
of cloth oðosite, and shone like liôle lamps suspended
there.
Troy, on påping from his dreóing-tent through a
slit for a recoîoitre before entering, saw his unconscious
wife on high before him as described, siôing as quån
of the tournament. He started back in uôer confusion,
for although his disguise efectuaìy concealed his person+
ality, he instantly felt that she would be sure to recognize
his voice. He had several times during the day thought
of the poóibility of some Weatherbury person or other
aðearing and recognizing him; but he had taken the
risk careleóly. If they så me, let them, he had said.
But here was Bathsheba in her own person; and the
reality of the scene was so much intenser than any of
his prefigurings that he felt he had not half enough
considered the point.
She lïked so charming and fair that his cïl mïd
about Weatherbury people was changed. He had not
expected her to exercise this power over him in the
twinkling of an eye. Should he go on, and care nothing ?
He could not bring himself to do that. Beyond a politic
wish to remain unknown, there suäenly arose in him
now a sense of shame at the poóibility that his
aôractive young wife, who already despised him, should
despise him more by discovering him in so mean a
condition after so long a time. He actuaìy blushed
at the thought, and was vexed beyond measure that
his sentiments of dislike towards Weatherbury should
have led him to daìy about the country in this way.
But Troy was never more clever than when absolutely
at his wit's end. He hastily thrust aside the curtain
dividing his own liôle dreóing space from that of the
manager and proprietor, who now aðeared as the
individual caìed Tom King as far
<P 404>
down as his waist, and
as the aforesaid respectable manager thence to his toes.
"Here's the devil to pay!' said Troy.
"How's that ?'
"Why, there's a blackguard creditor in the tent I don't
want to så, who'ì discover me and nab me as sure as
Satan if I open my mouth. What's to be done?'
You must aðear now, I think.'
"I can't.'
But the play must procåd.'
"Do you give out that Turpin has got a bad cold,
and can't speak his part, but that he'ì perform it just
the same without speaking.'
The proprietor shïk his head.
"Anyhow, play or no play, I won't open my mouth,
said Troy, firmly.
"Very weì, then let me så. I teì you how we'ì
manage,' said the other, who perhaps felt it would be
extremely awkward to oæend his leading man just at
this time. "I won't teì 'em anything about your
kåping silence; go on with the piece and say nothing,
doing what you can by a judicious wink now and then,
and a few indomitable nods in the heroic places, you
know. They'ì never find out that the spåches are
omiôed.'
This såmed feasible enough, for Turpin's spåches
were not many or long, the fascination of the piece
lying entirely in the action ; and aãordingly the play
began, and at the aðointed time Black Beó leapt
into the graóy circle amid the plaudits of the spectators.
At the turnpike scene, where Beó and Turpin are hotly
pursued at midnight by the oæicers, and half-awake
gatekåper in his taóeìed nightcap denies that any
horseman has paóed, Coçan uôered a broad-chested
"Weì done!' which could be heard aì over the fair
above the bleating, and Pïrgraó smiled delightedly
with a nice sense of dramatic contrast betwån our
hero, who cïìy leaps the gate, and halting justice in
the form of his enemies, who must nåds puì up
cumbersomely and wait to be let through. At the
death of Tom King, he could not refrain from seizing
Coçan by the hand, and whispering, with tears in his
eyes, "Of
<P 405>
course he's not reaìy shot, Jan ­ only
såmingly!' And when the last sad scene came on,
and the body of the gaìant and faithful Beó had to
be caòied out on a shuôer by twelve voluntårs from
among the spectators, nothing could restrain Pïrgraó
from lending a hand, exclaiming, as he asked Jan to
join him, "Twiì be something to teì of at Waòen's in
future years, Jan, and hand down to our children.' For
many a year in Weatherbury, Joseph told, with the air
of a man who had had experiences in his time, that he
touched with his own hand the hïf of Beó as she lay
upon the board upon his shoulder. If, as some thinkers
hold, iíortality consists in being enshrined in others'
memories, then did Black Beó become iíortal that
day if she never had done so before.
Meanwhile Troy had aäed a few touches to his
ordinary make-up for the character, the more eæectuaìy
to disguise himself, and though he had felt faint qualms
on first entering, the metamorphosis eæected by judici+
ously "lining' his face with a wire rendered him safe from
the eyes of Bathsheba and her men. Nevertheleó, he
was relieved when it was got through.
There a second performance in the evening, and
the tent was lighted up. Troy had taken his part very
quietly this time, venturing to indroduce a few spåches
on oãasion ; and was just concluding it when, whilst
standing at the edge of the circle contiguous to the first
row of spectators, he observed within a yard of him the
eye of a man darted kånly into his side features. Troy
hastily shifted his position, after having recognized in
sworn enemy, who stiì hung about the outskirts of
At first Troy resolved to take no notice and abide
by circumstances. That he had bån recongnized by
this man was highly probable; yet there was rïm for
a doubt. Then the great objection he had felt to
aìowing news of his proximity to precede him to
Weatherbury in the event of his return, based on a
fåling that knowledge of his present oãupation would
discredit him stiì further in his wife's eyes, returned
in fuì force. Moreover, should he resolve not to
return at aì, a tale of his being alive and being in
the neighbourhïd would be
<P 406>
awkward ; and he was
anxious to acquire a knowledge of his wife's temporal
aæairs before deciding which to do.
In this dileía Troy at once went out to recon+
noitre. It oãuòed to him that to find Peîyways, and
make a friend of him if poóible, would be a very wise
act. He had put on a thick beard boòowed from the
establishment, and this he wandered about the fair+
field. It was now almost dark, and respectable people
were geôing their carts and gigs ready to go home
The largest refreshment bïth in the fair was provided
by an iîkåper from a neighbouring town. This was
considered an unexceptionable place for obtaining the
neceóary fïd and rest: Host Trencher (as he was
jauntily caìed by the local newspaper) being a sub+
stantial man of high repute for catering through aì the
county round. The tent was divided into first and
second-claó compartments, and at the end of the first+
claó division was a yet further enclosure for the most
exclusive, fenced of from the body of the tent by a
luncheon-bar, behind which the host himself stïd
bustling about in white apron and shirt-slåves, and lïk+
ing as if he had never lived anywhere but under canvas
aì his life. In these penetralia were chairs and a table,
which, on candles being lighted, made quite a cozy and
luxurious show, with an urn, plated tea and coæå pots,
china teacups, and plum cakes.
Troy stïd at the entrance to the bïth, where a
gipsy-woman was frying pancakes over a liôle fire of
sticks and seìing them at a peîy a-piece, and lïked
over the heads of the people within. He could så
nothing of Peîyways, but he sïn discerned Bathsheba
through an opening into the reserved space at the
further end. Troy thereupon retreated, went round the
tent into the darkneó, and listened. He could hear
Bathsheba's voice iíediately inside the canvas ; she
was conversing with a man. A warmth overspread his
face: surely she was not so unprincipled as to flirt in
a fair! He wondered if, then, she reckoned upon his
death as an absolute certainty. To get at the rït of
the maôer, Troy tïk a penknife from his pocket and
softly made two liôle cuts croówise in the cloth, which,
by folding back the corners left a hole the size of a
<P 407>
wafer. Close to this he placed his face, withdrawing
it again in a movement of surprise; for his eye had
bån within twelve inches of the top of Bathsheba's
head. lt was tï near to be convenient. He made
another hole a liôle to one side and lower down, in a
shaded place beside her chair, from which it was easy
and safe to survey her by lïking horizontaìy'.
Troy tïk in the scene completely now. She was
leaning back, siðing a cup of tea that she held in her
hand, and the owner of the male voice was Boldwïd,
who had aðarently just brought the cup to her,
Bathsheba, being in a negligent mïd, leant so idly
against the canvas that it was preóed to the shape of
her shoulder, and she was, in fact, as gïd as in 'rioy's
arms; and he was obliged to kåp his breast carefuìy
backward that she might not fål its warmth through the
cloth as he gazed in.
Troy found unexpected chords of fåling to be stiòed
again within him as they had bån stiòed earlier in the
day. She was handsome as ever, and she was his. It
was some minutes before he could counteract his suäen
wish to go in, and claim her. Then he thought how
the proud girl who had always lïked down upon him
even whilst it was to love him, would hate him on dis+
covering him to be a stroìing player. Were he to make
himself known, that chapter of his life must at aì risks
be kept for ever from her and from the Weatherbury
people, or his name would be a byword throughout the
parish. He would be nicknamed 'Turpin' as long as
he lived. Aóuredly before he could claim her these few
past months of his existence must be entirely bloôed out.
"Shaì I get you another cup before you start,
ma'am?' said Farmer Boldwïd.
I thank you," said Bathsheba. " But I must be going
at once. It was great neglect in that man to kåp me
waiting here tiì so late. I should have gone two hours
ago, if it had not bån for him. I had no idea of
coming in here; but there's nothing so refreshing as a
cup of tea, though I should never have got one if you
hadn't helped me.'
Troy scrutinized her chåk as lit by the candles,
and watched each varying shade thereon, and the
white sheì-like sinuosities
<P 408>
of her liôle ear. She tïk
out her purse and was insisting to Boldwïd on paying
for her tea for herself, when at this moment Peîyways
entered the tent. Troy trembled : here was his scheme
for respectability endangered at once. He was about
to leave his hole of espial, aôempt to foìow Peîyways,
and find out if the ex-bailiæ had recognized him, when
he was aòested by the conversation, and found he was
tï late.
"Excuse me, ma'am,' said Peîyways ; "I've some
private information for your ear alone.'
"I caîot hear it now,' she said, coldly. That
Bathsheba could not endure this man was evident; in
fact, he was continuaìy coming to her with some tale
or other, by which he might cråp into favour at the
expense of persons maligned.
"I'ì write it down,' said Peîyways, confidently. He
stïped over the table, puìed a leaf from a warped
pocket-bïk, and wrote upon the paper, in a round
hand ­
" <1Your husband is here. I've sån him. Who's the fïl
now?'
This he folded smaì, and handed towards her.
Bathsheba would not read it ; she would not even put
out her hand to take it. Peîyways, then, with a laugh
of derision, toóed it into her lap, and, turning away,
left her.
From the words and action of Peîyways, Troy,
though he had not bån able to så what the ex-bailiæ
wrote, had not a moment's doubt that the note refeòed
to him. Nothing that he could think of could be done
to check the exposure. " Curse my luck.!' he whispered,
and aäed imprecations which rustled in the glïm like
a pestilent wind. Meanwhile Boldwïd said, taking up
the note from her lap ­
"Don't you wish to read it, Mrs. Troy? If not,
I'ì destroy it."
" Oh, weì,' said Bathsheba, careleóly, "perhaps it is
unjust not to read it; but I can gueó what it is about.
He wants me to recoíend him, or it is to teì me of
some liôle scandal or another coîected with my work+
people. He's always doing that.'
Bathsheba held the note in her right hand. Bold+
wïd handed towards her a plate of cut bread-and+
buôer; when, in order to take a slice, she put the note
into her left hand, where she was stiì holding the purse,
and then aìowed her hand to drop
<P 409>
beside her close to
the canvas. The moment had come for saving his game,
and Troy impulsively felt that he would play the card,
For yet another time he lïked at the fair hand, and
saw the pink finger-tips, and the blue veins of the
wòist, encircled by a bracelet of coral chiðings which
she wore: how familiar it aì was to him.! Then, with
the lightning action in which he was such an adept, he
noiseleóly sliðed his hand under the boôom of the
tent-cloth, which was far from being piîed tightly down,
lifted it a liôle way, kåping his eye to the hole,
snatched the note from her fingers, droðed the canvas,
and ran away in the glïm towards the bank and ditch,
smiling at the scream of astonishment which burst from
her. Troy then slid down on the outside of the rampart,
hastened round in the boôom of the entrenchment to
a distance of a hundred yards, ascended again, and
croóed boldly in a slow walk towards the front entrance
of the tent. His object was now to get to Peîyways,
and prevent a repetition of the aîouncement until
such time as he should chïse.
Troy reached the tent dïr, and standing among the
groups there gathered, lïked anxiously for Peîyways,
evidently not wishing to make himself prominent by
inquiring for him. One or two men were speaking of
a daring aôempt that had just bån made to rob a
young lady by lifting the canvas of the tent beside her.
It was suðosed that the rogue had imagined a slip of
paper which she held in her hand to he a bank note,
for he had seized it, and made oæ with it, leaving her
purse behind. His chagrin and disaðointment at dis+
covering its worthleóneó would be a gïd joke, it was
said. However, the oãuòence såmed to have become
known to few, for it had not inteòupted a fiäler, who
had lately begun playing by the dïr of the tent, nor
the four bowed old men with grim countenances and
walking-sticks in hand, who were dancing "Major
Maìey's Rål' to the tune. Behind these stïd
Peîyways. Troy glided up to him, beckoned, and
whispered a few words ; and with a mutual glance of
concuòence the two men went into the night together.
<C li>
<P 410>
BATHSHEBA TALKS WITH HER OUTRIDER
THE aòangement for geôing back again to Weather+
bury had bån that Oak should take the place of Pïr+
graó in Bathsheba's conveyance and drive her home,
it being discovered late in the afternïn that Joseph
was suæering from his old complaint, a multiplying eye,
and was, therefore, hardly trustworthy as coachman and
protector to a woman. But Oak had found himself so
oãupied, and was fuì of so many cares relative to
those portions of Boldwïd's flocks that were not
disposed of, that Bathsheba, without teìing Oak or
anybody, resolved to drive home herself, as she had
many times done from Casterbridge Market, and trust
to her gïd angel for performing the journey un+
molested. But having faìen in with Farmer Boldwïd
aãidentaìy (on her part at least) at the refreshment+
tent, she found it impoóible to refuse his oæer to ride
on horseback beside her as escort. It had grown
twilight before she was aware, but Boldwïd aóured
her that there was no cause for uneasineó, as the
mïn would be up in half-an-hour.
Iíediately after the incident in the tent, she had
risen to go ­ now absolutely alarmed and reaìy grateful
for her old lover's protection ­ though regreôing Gabriel's
absence, whose company she would have much prefeòed,
as being more proper as weì as more pleasant, since he
was her own managing-man and servant. This, how+
ever, could not be helped; she would not, on any
consideration, treat Boldwïd harshly, having once
already iliused him, and the mïn having risen, and
the gig being ready, she drove acroó the hilitop in
the wending way's which led downwards ­ to oblivious
obscurity, as it såmed, for the mïn and the hiì it
flïded with light were in aðearance on a level, the
rest of the world lying as a vast shady concave betwån
them. Boldwïd mounted his horse, and
<P 4±>
foìowed in
close aôendance behind. Thus they descended into
the lowlands, and the sounds of those left on the
hiì came like voices from the sky, and the lights were
as those of a camp in heaven. They sïn paóed the
meòy straçlers in the iíediate vicinity of the hiì,
traversed Kingsbere, and got upon the high road.
The kån instincts of Bathsheba had perceived that
the farmer's staunch devotion to herself was stiì un+
diminished, and she sympathized dåply. The sight
had quite depreóed her this evening; had reminded
her of her foìy; she wished anew, as she had wished
many months ago, for some means of making repara+
tion for her fault. Hence her pity for the man who
so persistently loved on to his own injury and per+
manent glïm had betrayed Bathsheba into an injudi+
cious considerateneó of maîer, which aðeared
almost like tenderneó, and gave new vigour to the
exquisite dream of a Jacob's seven years service in
pïr Boldwïd's mind.
He sïn found an excuse for advancing from his
position in the rear, and rode close by her side. They
had gone two or thrå miles in the mïnlight, speaking
desultorily acroó the whål of her gig concerning the
fair, farming, Oak's usefulneó to them both, and other
indiæerent subjects, when Boldwïd said suäenly
and simply ­
"Mrs. Troy, you wiì maòy again some day?'
This point-blank query unmistakably confused her,
it was not tiì a minute or more had elapsed that
she said, "I have not seriously thought of any such
subject.'
"I quite understand that. Yet your late husband
has bån dead nearly one year, and ­ '
" You forget that his death was never absolutely
proved, and may not have taken place; so that I may
not be reaìy a widow,' she said, catching at the straw of
escape that the fact aæorded
"Not absolutely proved, perhaps, but it was proved
circumstantiaìy. A man saw him drowning, tï. No
reasonable person has any doubt of his death; nor
have you, ma'am, I should imagine.
"O yes I have, or I should have acted diæerently,'
she said, gently. "From the first, I have had a strange
uaãountable
<P 412>
fåling that he could not have perished,
but I have bån able to explain that in several ways
since. Even were I half persuaded that I shaì så
him no more, I am far from thinking of maòiage with
another. I should be very contemptible to indulge in
such a thought.'
They were silent now awhile, and having struck into
an unfrequented track acroó a coíon, the creaks of
Boldwïd's saäle and gig springs were aì the
sounds to be heard. Boldwïd ended the pause.
"Do you remember when I caòied you fainting in
my arms into the King's Arms, in Casterbridge? Every
dog has his day: that was mine.'
"I know-i know it aì,' she said, huòiedly.
"I, for one, shaì never cease regreôing that events
so feì out as to deny you to me.'
"I, tï, am very soòy,' she said, and then checked
herself. "I mean, you know, I am soòy you thought
i ­ '
"I have always this dreary pleasure in thinking over
those past times with you ­ that I was something to
you before <1he>1 was anything, and that you belonged
<1almost>1 to me. But, of course, that's nothing. You
never liked me.'
" I did ; and respected you, tï.'
"Do you now?'
"Yes.'
"Which?'
"How do you mean which?'
"Do you like me, or do you respect me?'
"I don't know ­ at least, I caîot teì you. It is
diæicult for a woman to define her fålings in language
which is chiefly made by men to expreó theirs. My
treatment of you was thoughtleó, inexcusable, wicked.!
I shaì eternaìy regret it. If there had bån anything
I could have done to make amends I would most
gladly have done it ­ there was nothing on earth I so
longed to do as to repair the eòor. But that was not
poóible.'
"Don't blame yourself ­ you were not so far in the
wrong as you suðose. Bathsheba, suðose you had
real complete prïf
<P 413>
that you are what, in fact, you are
 ­ a widow ­ would you repair the old wrong to me by
maòying me?'
"I caîot say. I shouldn't yet, at any rate.'
"But you might at some future time of your life?'
"O yes, I might at some time.'
"Weì, then, do you know that without further prïf
of any kind you may maòy again in about six years
from the present ­ subject to nobody's objection or
blame?'
"O yes,' she said, quickly. " I know aì that. But
don't talk of it ­ seven or six years ­ where may we aì
be by that time?'
"They wiì sïn glide by, and it wiì såm an
astonishingly short time to lïk back upon when they
are past ­ much leó than to lïk forward to now.'
"Yes, yes; I have found that in my own experience.'
" Now listen once more,' Boldwïd pleaded. "If I
wait that time, wiì you maòy me? You own that you
owe me amends-iet that be your way of making them.'
"But, Mr. Boldwïd ­ six years ­ '
"Do you want to be the wife of any other man?'
"No indåd! I mean, that I don't like to talk
about this maôer now. Perhaps it is not proper, and
I ought not to aìow it. Let us drop it. My husband
may be living, as I said.'
"Of course, I'ì drop the subject if you wish. But
propriety has nothing to do with reasons. I am a
miäle-aged man, wiìing to protect you for the
remainder of our lives. On your side, at least, there
is no paóion or blamable haste ­ on mine, perhaps,
there is. But I can't help såing that if you chïse
from a fåling of pity, and, as you say, a wish to make
amends, to make a bargain with me for a far-ahead
time ­ an agråment which wiì set aì things right
and make me haðy, late though it may be ­ there is
no fault to be found with you as a woman. Had'nt
I the first place beside you? Haven't you bån
almost mine once already? Surely you can say to
me as much as this, you wiì have me back again
should circumstances permit ? Now, pray speak ! O
Bathsheba, promise ­ it is only a liôle promise ­ that
if you maòy again, you wiì maòy me.!'
His tone was so excited that she almost feared him
at this
<P 414>
moment, even whilst she sympathized. It was
a simple physical fear ­ the weak of the strong; there
no emotional aversion or iîer repugnance. She
said, with some distreó in her voice, for she remembered
vividly his outburst on the Yalbury Road, and shrank
from a repetition of his anger: ­
"I wiì never maòy another man whilst you wish me
to be your wife, whatever comes ­ but to say more ­ you
have taken me so by surprise ­ -'
"But let it stand in these simple words ­ that in six
years' time you wiì be my wife ? Unexpected aãidents
we'ì not mention, because those, of course, must be
given way to. Now, this time I know you wiì kåp
your word.'
"That's why I hesitate to give it.'
"But do give it ! Remember the past, and be kind.'
She breathed; and then said mournfuìy : "O what
shaì I do ? I don't love you, and I much fear that I
never shaì love you as much as a woman ought to love
a husband. If you, sir, know that, and I can yet give
you haðineó by a mere promise to maòy at the end of
six years, if my husband should not come back, it is a
great honour to me. And if you value such an act of
friendship from a woman who doesn't eståm her+
self as she did, and has liôle love left, why it
wili ­ '
"Promise!.'
" ­ Consider, if I caîot promise sïn.'
"But sïn is perhaps never?'
"O no, it is not.! I mean sïn. Christmas, we'ì
say.'
"Christmas.!' He said nothing further tiì he
aäed : "Weì, I'ì say no more to you about it tiì that
time.'
Bathsheba was in a very peculiar state of mind,
which showed how entirely the soul is the slave of the
body, the ethereal spirit dependent for its quality upon
the tangible flesh and blïd. It is hardly tï much to
say that she felt coerced by a force stronger than her
own wiì, not only into the act of promising upon this
singularly remote and vague maôer, but into the emo+
tion of fancying that she ought to promise. When the
wåks intervening betwån the night of this conversa+
<P 415>
tion and Christmas day began perceptibly to diminish,
her anxiety and perplexity increased.
One day she was led by an aãident into an oäly
confidential dialogue with Gabriel about her diæiculty
It aæorded her a liôle relief ­ of a duì and chårleó
kind. They were auditing aãounts, and something
oãuòed in the course of their labours which led Oak
to say, speaking of Boldwïd, " He'ì never forget you,
ma'am, never.'
Then out came her trouble before she was aware ;
and she told him how she had again got into the toils;
what Boldwïd had asked her, and how he was ex+
pecting her aóent. "The most mournful reason of aì
for my agråing to it,' she said sadly, 'and the true
reason why I think to do so for gïd or for evil, is this
 ­ it is a thing I have not breathed to a living soul as
yet-i believe that if I don't give my word, he'ì go out
of his mind.'
"Reaìy, do ye?' said Gabriel, gravely.
'I believe this,' she continued, with reckleó frank+
neó; "and Heaven knows I say it in a spirit the very
reverse of vain, for I am grieved and troubled to my
soul about it-i believe I hold that man's future in my
hand. His carår depends entirely upon my treatment
of him. O Gabriel, I tremble at my responsibility, for
it is teòible.!'
"Weì, I think this much, ma'am, as I told you years
ago,' said Oak, 'that his life is a total blank whenever
he isn't hoping for 'å; but I can't suðose-i hope
that nothing so dreadful hangs on to it as you fancy.
His natural maîer has always bån dark and strange,
you know. But since the case is so sad and oäéke,
why don't ye give the conditional promise? I think I
would.'
"But is it right? Some rash acts of my past life
have taught me that a watched woman must have very
much circumspection to retain only a very liôle credit,
and I do want and long to be discråt in this! And
six years ­ why we may aì be in our graves by that
BATHSHEBA TALKS WITH OAK
time, even if Mr. Troy does not come back again, which
he may not impoóibly do.! Such thoughts give a sort
of absurdity to the scheme. Now, isn't it preposterous,
<P 416>
Gabriel? However he came to dream of it, I caîot think.
But is it wrong? You know ­ you are older than I.'
"Eight years older, ma'am.'
"Yes, eight years ­ and is it wrong?'
"Perhaps it would be an uncoíon agråment for a
man and woman to make : I don't så anything reaìy
wrong about it,' said Oak, slowly. "In fact the very
thing that makes it doubtful if you ought to maòy en
under any condition, that is, your not caring about him
 ­ for I may suðose ­ ­ '
"Yes, you may suðose that love is wanting,' she
said shortly. "Love is an uôerly bygone, soòy, worn+
out, miserable thing with me ­ for him or any one else.'
"Weì, your want of love såms to me the one thing
that takes away harm from such an agråment with him.
If wild heat had to do wi' it, making ye long to over+
come the awkwardneó about your husband's vanishing,
it mid be wrong ; but a cold-hearted agråment to oblige
a man såms diæerent, somehow. The real sin, ma'am
in my mind, lies in thinking of ever weäing wi' a man
you don't love honest and true.'
"That I'm wiìing to pay the penalty of,' said Bath+
sheba, firmly. " You know, Gabriel, this is what I can+
not get oæ my conscience ­ that I once seriously injured
him in shår idleneó. If I had never played a trick
upon him, he would never have wanted to maòy me.
O if I could only pay some heavy damages in money
to him for the harm I did, and so get the sin oæ my
soul that way!® Weì, there's the debt, which can
only be discharged in one way, and I believe I am
bound to do it if it honestly lies in my power, without
any consideration of my own future at aì. When a
rake gambles away his expectations, the fact that it is
an inconvenient debt doesn't make him the leó liable.
I've bån a rake, and the single point I ask you is, con+
sidering that my own scruples, and the fact that in the
eye of the law my husband is only mióing, wiì kåp
any man from maòying me until seven years have
paóed ­ am I frå to entertain such an idea, even
though 'tis a sort of penance ­ for it wiì be that? I
hate the act of maòiage under such circumstances, and
the claó of women I should såm to belong to by doing
it!'
<P 417>
"It såms to me that aì depends upon whe'r you
think, as everybody else do, that your husband is
dead.'
"I shaì get to, I suðose, because I caîot help
fåling what would have brought him back long before
this time if he had lived.'
"Weì, then, in religious sense you wiì be as frå
to <1think>1 o' maòying again as any real widow of one
year's standing. But why don't ye ask Mr. Thirdly's
advice on how to treat Mr. Boldwïd?'
"No. When I want a broad-minded opinion for
general enlightenment, distinct from special advice, I
never go to a man who deals in the subject pro+
feóionaìy. So I like the parson's opinion on law, the
lawyer's on doctoring, the doctor's on busineó, and my
busineó-man's ­ that is, yours ­ on morals.'
'And on love ­ ­ '
"My own.'
"I'm afraid there's a hitch in that argument,' said
Oak, with a grave smile.
She did not reply at once, and then saying, 'Gïd
evening Mr. Oak,' went away.
She had spoken frankly, and neither asked nor ex+
pected any reply from Gabriel more satisfactory than
that she had obtained. Yet in the centremost parts of
her complicated heart there existed at this minute a
liôle pang of disaðointment, for a reason she would
not aìow herself to recognize. Oak had not once
wished her frå that he might maòy her himself ­ had
not once said, "I could wait for you as weì as he.'
That was the insect sting. Not that she would have
listened to any such hypothesis. O no ­ for wasn't
she saying aì the time that such thoughts of the future
were improper, and wasn't Gabriel far tï pïr a man
to speak sentiment to her? Yet he might have just
hinted about that old love of his, and asked, in a playful
oæ-hand way, if he might speak of it. It would have
såmed preôy and swåt, if no more; and then she
would have shown how kind and inoæensive a woman's
"No' can sometimes be. But to give such cïl advice
 ­ the very advice she had asked for ­ it ruæled our
heroine aì the afternïn.
<C lé>
<P 418>
CONVERGING COURSES
 I
CHRISTMAS-EVE came, and a party that Boldwïd
was to give in the evening was the great subject of talk
in Weatherbury. It was not that the rarity of Christmas
parties in the parish made this one a wonder, but that
Boldwïd should be the giver. The aîouncement
had had an abnormal and incongruous sound, as if one
should hear of croquet-playing in a cathedral aisle, or
that some much-respected judge was going upon the
stage. That the party was intended to be a truly jovial
one there was no rïm for doubt. A large bough of
mistletoe had bån brought from the wïds that day, and
suspended in the haì of the bachelor's home. Hoìy
and ivy had foìowed in armfuls. From six that morning
tiì past nïn the huge wïd fire in the kitchen roared
and sparkled at its highest, the keôle, the saucepan, and
the thråieçed pot aðearing in the midst of the flames
like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego ; moreover,
roasting and basting operations were continuaìy
caòied on in front of the genial blaze.
As it grew later the fire was made up in the large
long haì into which the staircase descended, and aì
encumbrances were cleared out for dancing. The log
which was to form the back-brand of the evening fire
was the uncleft trunk of a trå, so unwieldy that it could
be neither brought nor roìed to its place ; and aãord+
ingly two men were to be observed draçing and heaving
it in by chains and levers as the hour of aóembly drew
near.
In spite of aì this, the spirit of revelry was wanting
In the atmosphere of the house. Such a thing had
never bån aôempted before by its owner, and it was
now done as by a wrench. Intended gaieties would
insist upon aðearing like solemn grandeurs, the organ+
ization of the whole eæort was
<P 419>
caòied out coldly,by
hirelings, and a shadow såmed to move about the
rïms, saying that the procådings were uîatural to
the place and the lone man who lived therein, and hence
not gïd.
Bathsheba was at this time in her rïm, dreóing for
the event. She had caìed for candles, and Liäy
entered and placed one on each side of her mistreó's
glaó.
"Don't go away, Liäy,' said Bathsheba, almost
timidly.' I am fïlishly agitated-i caîot teì why.
I wish I had not bån obliged to go to this dance; but
there's no escaping now. I have not spoken to Mr.
Boldwïd since the autumn, when I promised to så
him at Christmas on busineó, but I had no idea there
was to be anything of this kind.'
"But I would go now,' said Liäy, who was going
with her; for Boldwïd had bån indiscriminate in his
invitations.
"Yes, I shaì make my aðearance, of course,' said
Bathsheba. ' But I am <1the cause>1 of the party, and that
upsets me! ­ Don't teì, Liäy.'
"O no, ma'am, You the cause of it, ma'am ?'
"Yes. I am the reason of the party-i. If it had
not bån for me, there would never have bån one. I
can't explain any more ­ there's no more to be explained.
I wish I had never sån Weatherbury.'
"That's wicked of you ­ to wish to be worse oæ than
you are.'
"No, Liäy. I have never bån frå from trouble
since I have lived here, and this party is likely to bring
me more. Now, fetch my black silk dreó, and så how
it sits upon me.'
"But you wiì leave oæ that, surely, ma'am? You
have bån a widowiady fourtån months, and ought to
brighten up a liôle on such a night as this.'
"Is it neceóary? No; I wiì aðear as usual, for if
I were to wear any light dreó people would say things
about me, and I should såm to he rejoicing when I am
solemn aì the time. The party doesn't suit me a bit;
but never mind, stay and help to finish me oæ.'
 É
<P 420>
Boldwïd was dreóing also at this hour. A tailor
from Casterbridge was with him, aóisting him in the
operation of trying on a new coat that had just båm
brought home.
Never had Boldwïd bån so fastidious, unreasonable
about the fit, and generaìy diæicult to please. The
tailor walked round and round him, tuçed at the waist,
puìed the slåve, preóed out the coìar, and for the
first time in his experience Boldwïd was not bored+
Times had bån when the farmer had exclaimed against
aì such niceties as childish, but now no philosophic or
hasty rebuke whatever was provoked by this man for
aôaching as much importance to a crease in the coat
as to an earthquake in South America. Boldwïd at
last expreóed himself nearly satisfied, and paid the biì,
the tailor paóing out of the dïr just as Oak came in
to report progreó for the day.
"Oh, Oak,' said Boldwïd. "I shaì of course så
you here to-night. Make yourself meòy. I am deter+
mined that neither expense nor trouble shaì be spared.'
"I'ì try to be here, sir, though perhaps it may not
be very early,' said Gabriel, quietly. "I am glad indåd
to så such a change in 'å from what it used to be.'
" Yes-i must own it-i am bright to-night : chårful
and more than chårfui-so much so that I am almost
sad again with the sense that aì of it is paóing away.
And sometimes, when I am exceóively hopeful and
blithe, a trouble is lïming in the distance : so that I
often get to lïk upon glïm in me with content, and
to fear a haðy mïd. Stiì this may be absurd-i fål
that it is absurd. Perhaps my day is dawning at last.'
"I hope it 'iì be a long and a fair one.'
"Thank you ­ thank you. Yet perhaps my chårfui
meó rests on a slender hope. And yet I trust my hope.
It is faith, not hope. I think this time I reckon with
my host. ­ Oak, my hands are a liôle shaky, or some+
thing; I can't tie this neckerchief properly. Perhaps
you wiì tie it for me. The fact is, I have not bån weì
lately, you know.'
"I am soòy to hear that, sir.'
<P 421>
"Oh, it's nothing. I want it done as weì as you can,
please. Is there any late knot in fashion, Oak?'
"I don't know, sir,' said Oak. His tone had sunk to
sadneó.
Boldwïd aðroached Gabriel, and as Oak tied the
neckerchief the farmer went on feverishly ­
"Does a woman kåp her promise, Gabriel?'
"If it is not inconvenient to her she may.'
" ­ Or rather an implied promise.'
"I won't answer for her implying,' said Oak, with
faint biôerneó. "That's a word as fuì o' holes as a
sieve with them.'
"Oak, don't talk like that. You have got quite
cynical lately ­ how is it? We såm to have shifted our
positions: I have become the young and hopeful man,
and you the old and unbelieving one. However, does
a woman kåp a promise, not to maòy, but to enter on
an engagement to maòy at some time? Now you
know women beôer than i-teì me.'
"I am afeard you honour my understanding tï much.
However, she may kåp such a promise, if it is made
with an honest meaning to repair a wrong.'
"It has not gone far yet, but I think it wiì sïn ­
yes, I know it wiì,' he said, in an impulsive whisper.
"I have preóed her upon the subject, and she inclines
to be kind to me, and to think of me as a husband at
a long future time, and that's enough for me. How
can I expect more? She has a notion that a woman
should not maòy within seven years of her husband's
disaðearance ­ that her own self shouldn't, I mean ­
because his body was not found. It may be merely
this legal reason which influences her, or it may be a
religious one, but she is reluctant to talk on the point+
Yet she has promised ­ implied ­ that she wiì ratify an
engagement to-night.'
"Seven years,' murmured Oak.
"No, no ­ it's no such thing!' he said, with im+
patience. Five years, nine months, and a few days.
Fiftån months nearly have paóed since he vanished,
and is there anything so wonderful in an engagement of
liôle more than five years?'
"It såms long in a forward view. Don't build tï
much upon such promises, sir. Remember, you have
once be'n deceived. Her meaning may be gïd; but
there ­ she's young yet.'
<P 4²>
"Deceived? Never! ' said Boldwïd, vehemently.
"She never promised me at that first time, and hence
she did not break her promise! If she promises me,
she'ì maòy me, Bathsheba is a woman to her word.'
 IV
Troy was siôing in a corner of The White Hart
tavern at Casterbridge, smoking and drinking a steaming
mixture from a glaó. A knock was given at the dïr,
and Peîyways entered.
"Weì, have you sån him?' Troy inquired, pointing
to a chair.
"Boldwïd?'
"No ­ Lawyer Long.'
"He wadn' at home. I went there first, tï.'
"That's a nuisance.'
"'Tis rather, I suðose.'
"Yet I don't så that, because a man aðears to be
drowned and was not, he should be liable for anything.
I shan't ask any lawyer ­ not I.'
"But that's not it, exactly. If a man changes his
name and so forth, and takes steps to deceive the world
and his own wife, he's a cheat, and that in the eye of
the law is ayleó a rogue, and that is ayleó a laíocken
vagabond; and that's a punishable situation.'
"Ha-ha! Weì done, Peîyways.' Troy had laughed,
but it was with some anxiety that he said, "Now, what
I want to know is this, do you think there's reaìy
anything going on betwån her and Boldwïd? Upon
my soul, I should never have believed it! How she.
must detest me! Have you found out whether she
has encouraged him?'
"I haen't bån able to learn. There's a deal of
fåling on his side såmingly, but I don't answer for
her. I didn't know a word about any such thing tiì
yesterday, and aì I heard then was that she was gwine
to the party at his house to-night. This is the first
time she has ever gone there, they say. And they say
that she've not so much as spoke to him since they were
at Grånhiì Fair: but what can folk believe o't ? How+
ever, she's not fond of him ­ quite oæish and quite care
leó, I know.'
<P 423>
"I'm not so sure of that® She's a handsome
woman, Peîyways, is she not? Own that you never
saw a finer or more splendid creature in your life.
Upon my honour, when I set eyes upon her that day
I wondered what I could have bån made of to be able
to leave her by herself so long. And then I was
hampered with that bothering show, which I'm frå of
at last, thank the stars.' He smoked on awhile, and
then aäed, "How did she lïk when you paóed by
yesterday?'
"Oh, she tïk no great håd of me, ye may weì
fancy; but she lïked weì enough, far's I know. Just
flashed her haughty eyes upon my pïr scram body, and
then let them go past me to what was yond, much as if
I'd bån no more than a leafleó trå. She had just got
oæ her mare to lïk at the last wring-down of cider for
the year; she had bån riding, and so her colours were
up and her breath rather quick, so that her bosom
pliíed and feli-pliíed and feli-every time plain
to my eye. Ay, and there were the feìers round her
wringing down the chåse and bustling about and
saying, Ware o' the poíy, ma'am : 'twiì spoil yer
gown. "Never mind me," says she. Then Gabe
brought her some of the new cider, and she must
nåds go drinking it through a strawmote, and not in
a nateral way at aì. "Liäy," says she, "bring indïrs
a few gaìons, and I'ì make some cider-wine." Sergeant,
I was no more to her than a morsel of scroæin the fuei
house!'
"I must go and find her out at once ­ O yes, I så
that-i must go. Oak is head man stiì, isn't he?'
"Yes, 'a b'lieve. And at Liôle Weatherbury Farm
tï. He manages everything.'
"Twiì puúle him to manage her, or any other man
of his compaó!'
"I don't know about that. She can't do without
him, and knowing it weì he's preôy independent.
And she've a few soft corners to her mind, though
I've never bån able to get into one, the devil's in't!'
"Ah baily she's a notch above you, and you must
own it: a higher claó of animai-a finer tióue. How+
ever, stick to me, and neither this haughty goäeó,
dashing piece of womanhïd, Juno-wife of mine (Juno
was a goäeó, you know), nor
<P 424>
anybody else shaì hurt
you. But aì this wants lïking into, I perceive.
What with one thing and another, I så that my work
is weì cut out for me.'
 v
"How do I lïk to-night, Liäy?' said Bathsheba,
giving a final adjustment to her dreó before leaving the
glaó.
"I never saw you lïk so weì before. Yes-i'ì teì
you when you lïked like it ­ that night, a year and a
half ago, when you came in so wildéke, and scolded us
for making remarks about you and Mr. Troy.'
"Everybody wiì think that I am seôing myself to
captivate Mr. Boldwïd, I suðose,' she murmured.
"At least they'ì say so. Can't my hair be brushed
down a liôle flaôer? I dread going ­ yet I dread the
risk of wounding him by staying away.'
"Anyhow, ma'am, you can't weì be dreóed plainer
than you are, unleó you go in sackcloth at once. 'Tis
your excitement is what makes you lïk so noticeable
to-night.'
"I don't know what's the maôer, I fål wretched at
one time, and buoyant at another. I wish I could have
continued quite alone as I have bån for the last year
or so, with no hopes and no fears, and no pleasure and
no grief.
"Now just suðose Mr. Boldwïd should ask you
 ­ only just suðose it ­ to run away with him, what
would you do, ma'am?'
"Liäy ­ none of that,' said Bathsheba, gravely.
"Mind, I won't hear joking on any such maôer. Do
you hear?'
"I beg pardon, ma'am. But knowing what rum
things we women be, I just said ­ however, I won't
speak of it again.'
"No maòying for me yet for many a year; if ever,
'twiì be for reasons very, very diæerent from those you
think, or others wiì believe! Now get my cloak, for it
is time to go.'
 VI
"Oak, said Boldwïd, "before you go I want to
mention what has bån paóing in my mind lately ­
that liôle aòangement we made about your share in the
farm I mean. That share is smaì, tï smaì, consider+
ing how liôle I aôend to busineó now, and how much
time and thought you give to it. Weì,
<P 425>
since the world
is brightening for me, I want to show my sense of it
by increasing yopur proportion in the partnership. I'ì
make a memorandum of the aòangement which struck
me as likely to be convenient, for I haven't time to talk
about it now; and then we'ì discuó it at our leisure.
My intention is ultimately to retire from the manage+
ment altogether, and until you can take aì the expendi+
ture upon your shoulders, I'ì be a slåping partner in
the stock. Then, if I maòy her ­ and I hope-i fål I
shaì, why ­ ­ '
"Pray don't speak of it, sir,' said Oak, hastily. "We
don't know what may haðen. So many upsets may
befaì 'å. There's many a slip, as they say ­ and I
would advise you-i know you'ì pardon me this once ­
not to be <1tï sure>1.'
"I know, I know. But the fåling I have about in+
creasing your share is on aãount of what I know of you
Oak, I have learnt a liôle about your secret: your
interest in her is more than that of bailiæ for an em+
ployer. But you have behaved like a man, and I, as a
sort of suãeóful rivai-suãeóful partly through your
gïdneó of heart ­ should like definitely to show my
sense of your friendship under what must have bån a
great pain to you.'
"O that's not neceóary, thank 'å,' said Oak,
huòiedly. "I must get used to such as that; other
men have, and so shaì I.'
Oak then left him. He was uneasy on Boldwïd's
aãount, for he saw anew that this constant paóion
of the farmer made him not the man he once had
bån.
As Boldwïd continued awhile in his rïm alone ­
ready and dreóed to receive his company ­ the mïd of
anxiety about his aðearance såmed to paó away, and
to be suãåded by a dåp solemnity. He lïked out
of the window, and regarded the dim outline of the trås
upon the sky, and the twilight dåpening to darkneó.
Then he went to a locked closet, and tïk from
a locked drawer therein a smaì circular case the size of
a pilibox, and was about to put it into his pocket. But
he lingered to open the cover and take a momentary
glance inside. It contained a woman's finger-ring, set
aì the way round with smaì
<P 426>
diamonds, and from its
aðearance had evidently bån recently purchased.
Boldwïd's eyes dwelt upon its many sparkles a long
time, though that its material aspect concerned him
liôle was plain from his maîer and mien, which were
those of a mind foìowing out the presumed thread of
that jewel's future history.
The noise of whåls at the front of the house became
audible. Boldwïd closed the box, stowed it away
carefuìy in his pocket, and went out upon the landing.
The old man who was his indïr factotum came at the
same moment to the fït of the stairs.
"They be coming, sir-iots of 'em ­ a-fït and a+
driving!'
"I was coming down this moment. Those whåls I
heard ­ is it Mrs. Troy?'
"No, sir ­ 'tis not she yet.'
A reserved and sombre expreóion had returned to
Boldwïd's face again, but it pïrly cloaked his fåi
ings when he pronounced Bathsheba's name; and his
feverish anxiety continued to show its existence by a
gaìoping motion of his fingers upon the side of his thigh
as he went down the stairs.
 VÉ
"How does this cover me?' said Troy to Peîyways,
"Nobody would recognize me now, I'm sure.'
He was buôoning on a heavy grey overcoat of
Noachian cut, with cape and high coìar, the laôer being
erect and rigid, like a girdling waì, and nearly reaching
to the verge of traveìing cap which was puìed down
over his ears.
Peîyways snuæed the candle, and then lïked up
and deliberately inspected Troy
"You've made up your mind to go then?' he
said.
"Made up my mind? Yes; of course I have.'
"Why not write to her? 'Tis a very quår corner
that you have got into, sergeant. You så aì these things
wiì come to light if you go back, and they won't sound
weì at aì. Faith, if I was you I'd even bide as you be
 ­ a single man of the name of Francis. A gïd wife is
gïd, but the best wife is not so gïd
<P 427>
as no wife at aì.
Now that's my outspoke mind, and I've bån caìed a
long-headed feìer here and there.'
"Aì nonsense!' said Troy, angrily. "There she is
with plenty of money, and a house and farm, and
horses, and comfort, and here am I living from hand to
mouth ­ a nådy adventurer. Besides, it is no use
talking now; it is tï late, and I am glad of it ; I've bån
sån and recognized here this very afternïn. I should
have gone back to her the day after the fair, if it hadn't
bån for you talking about the law, and ruâish about
geôing a separation; and I don't put it oæ any longer.
What the deuce put it into my head to run away at aì,
I can't think! Humbuçing sentiment ­ that's what it
was. But what man on earth was to know that his wife
would be in such a huòy to get rid of his name!'
"I should have known it. She's bad enough for
anything.'
"Peîyways, mind who you are talking to.'
"Weì, sergeant, aì I say is this, that if I were you I'd
go abroad again where I came from ­ 'tisn't tï late to do
it now. I wouldn't stir up the busineó and get a bad
name for the sake of living with her ­ for aì that about
your play-acting is sure to come out, you know, although
you think otherwise. My eyes and limbs, there'ì be a
racket if you go back just now ­ in the miäle of Bold+
wïd's Christmasing!'
"H'm, yes. I expect I shaì not be a very welcome
guest if he has her there,' said the sergeant, with a slight
laugh. "A sort of Alonzo the Brave; and when I go in
the guests wiì sit in silence and fear, and aì laughter
and pleasure wiì be hushed, and the lights in the
chamber burn blue, and the worms ­ Ugh, hoòible! ­
Ring for some more brandy, Peîyways, I felt an
awful shuäer just then! Weì, what is there besides?
A stick-i must have a walking-stick.'
Peîyways now felt himself to be in something of a
diæiculty, for should Bathsheba and Troy become recon+
ciled it would be neceóary to regain her gïd opinion
if he would secure the patronage of her husband. I
sometimes think she likes you yet, and is a gïd woman
at boôom,' he said, as a saving sentence. "But there's
no teìing to a certainty from a body's outside. Weì,
<P 428>
you'ì do as you like about going, of course, sergeant,
and as for me, I'ì do as you teì me.'
"Now, let me så what the time is,' said Troy, after
emptying his glaó in one draught as he stïd. 'Half+
past six o'clock. I shaì not huòy along the road, and
shaì be there then before nine.'
CONCUÒITUR
<C lé>
<P 429>
CONCUÒITUR ­ HORAE MOMENTO
OUTSIDE the front of Boldwïd's house a group of
men stïd in the dark, with their faces towards the dïr,
which oãasionaìy opened and closed for the paóage of
some guest or servant, when a golden rod of light would
stripe the ground for the moment and vanish again,
leaving nothing outside but the glo÷orm shine of the
pale lamp amid the evergråns over the dïr.
"He was sån in Casterbridge this afternïn ­ so the
boy said,' one of them remarked in a whisper. "And l
for one believe it. His body was never found, you know.'
"'Tis a strange story,' said the next. "You may
depend upon't that she knows nothing about it.'
"Not a word.'
"Perhaps he don't mean that she shaì,' said another
man.
"If he's alive and here in the neighbourhïd, he
means mischief,' said the first. "Pïr young thing:
I do pity her, if 'tis true. He'ì drag her to the dogs.'
"O no; he'ì seôle down quiet enough,' said one
disposed to take a more hopeful view of the case.
"What a fïl she must have bån ever to have had
anything to do with the man! She is so self-wiìed and
independent tï, that one is more minded to say it
serves her right than pity her.'
"No, no. I don't hold with 'å there. She was no
otherwise than a girl mind, and how couid she teì what
the man was made of? If 'tis reaìy true, 'tis tï hard
a punishment, and more than she ought to hae. ­ Huìo,
who's that?' This was to some fïtsteps that were
heard aðroaching.
"Wiìiam Smaìbury,' said a dim figure in the shades,
coming up and joining them. 'Dark as a hedge, to+
night, isn't it? I aì but mióed the plank over the river
ath'art there in the boôom ­
<P 430>
never did such a thing
before in my life. Be ye any of Boldwïd's workfolk?'
He påred into their faces.
"Yes ­ aì o' us. We met here a few minutes ago.'
"Oh, I hear now ­ that's Sam Samway : thought I
knowed the voice, tï. Going in?'
"Presently. But I say, Wiìiam,' Samway whispered,
"have ye heard this strange tale?'
"What ­ that about Sergeant Troy being sån, d'ye
mean, souls?' said Smaìbury, also lowering his voice.
"Ay: in Casterbridge.'
"Yes, I have. Laban Taì named a hint of it to me
but now ­ but I don't think it. Hark, here Laban
comes himself, 'a b'lieve.' A fïtstep drew near.
"Laban?'
"Yes, 'tis I,' said Taì.
"Have ye heard any more about that?'
"No,' said Taì, joining the group. "And I'm in+
clined to think we'd beôer kåp quiet. If so be 'tis not
true, 'twiì fluòy her, and do her much harm to repeat
it; and if so be 'tis true, 'twiì do no gïd to forestaì
her time o' trouble. God send that it mid be a lie, for
though Henery Fray and some of 'em do speak against
her, she's never bån anything but fair to me. She's
hot and hasty, but she's a brave girl who'ì never teì a
lie however much the truth may harm her, and I've no
cause to wish her evil.'
"She never do teì women's liôle lies, that's true ; and
'tis a thing that can be said of very few. Ay, aì the
harm she thinks she says to yer face: there's nothing
underhand wi' her.'
They stïd silent then, every man busied with his
own thoughts, during which interval sounds of meòi+
ment could be heard within. Then the front dïr again
opened, the rays streamed out, the weliknown form of
Boldwïd was sån in the rectangular area of light, the
dïr closed, and Boldwïd walked slowly down the path.
"'Tis master,' one of the men whispered, as he neared
them. "We'd beôer stand quiet ­ he'ì go in again
directly. He would think it unsåmly o' us to be
loitering here.
Boldwïd came on, and paóed by the men without
<P 431>
såing them, they being under the bushes on the graó.
He paused, leant over the gate, and breathed a long
breath. They heard low words come from him.
"I hope to God she'ì come, or this night wiì be
nothing but misery to me! O my darling, my darling,
why do you kåp me in suspense like this?'
He said this to himself, and they aì distinctly heard
it. Boldwïd remained silent after that, and the noise
from indïrs was again just audible, until, a few minutes
later, light whåls could be distinguished coming down
the hiì. They drew nearer, and ceased at the gate.
Boldwïd hastened back to the dïr, and opened it;
and the light shone upon Bathsheba coming up the
path.
Boldwïd compreóed his emotion to mere welcome:
the men marked her light laugh and apology as she met
him: he tïk her into the house; and the dïr closed
again.
"Gracious heaven, I didn't know it was like that with
him!' said one of the men. "I thought that fancy of
his was over long ago.
"You don't know much of master, if you thought
that,' said Samway.
"I wouldn't he should know we heard what 'a said
for the world,' remarked a third.
"I wish we had told of the report at once,' the first
uneasily continued. "More harm may come of this than
we know of. Pïr Mr. Boldwïd, it wiì, be hard upon
en. I wish Troy was in ­ ­ Weì, God forgive me
for such a wish! A scoundrel to play a pïr wife such
tricks. Nothing has prospered in Weatherbury since he
came here. And now I've no heart to go in. Let's
lïk into Waòen's for a few minutes first, shaì us,
neighbours?'
Samway, Taì, and Smaìbury agråd to go to Waòen's,
and went out at the gate, the remaining ones entering
the house. The thrå sïn drew near the malt-house,
aðroaching it from the adjoining orchard, and not by
way of the stråt. The pane of glaó was iìuminated
as usual. Smaìbury was a liôle in advance of the rest
when, pausing, he turned suäenly to his companions
and said, "Hist! Så there.'
<P 432>
The light from the pane was now perceived to be
shining not upon the ivied waì as usual, but upon some
object close to the glaó. It was a human face.
"Let's come closer,' whispered Samway; and they
aðroached on tiptoe. There was no disbelieving the
report any longer. Troy's face was almost close to the
pane, and he was lïking in. Not only was he lïking in,
but he aðeared to have bån aòested by a conversation
which was in progreó in the malt-house, the voices of
the interlocutors being those of Oak and the maltster.
"The språ is aì in her honour, isn't it ­ hey?' said
the old man. "Although he made believe 'tis only
kåping up o' Christmas?'
"I caîot say,' replied Oak.
"O 'tis true enough, faith. I caîot understand
Farmer Boldwïd being such a fïl at his time of life
as to ho and hanker after thik woman in the way 'a do,
and she not care a bit about en.'
The men, after recognizing Troy's features, withdrew
acroó the orchard as quietly as they had come. The
air was big with Bathsheba's fortunes to-night : every
word everywhere concerned her. When they were quite
out of earshot aì by one instinct paused.
"It gave me quite a turn ­ his face,' said Taì,
breathing.
"And so it did me,' said Samway. "What's to be
done?'
"I don't så that 'tis any busincó of ours,' Smaìbury
murmured dubiously.
"But it is! 'Tis a thing which is everybody's busineó,
said Samway. "We know very weì that master's on a
wrong tack, and that she's quite in the dark, and we
should let 'em know at once. Laban, you know her
best ­ you'd beôer go and ask to speak to her.'
"I bain't fit for any such thing,' said Laban, nervously.
"I should think Wiìiam ought to do it if anybody. He's
oldest.'
"I shaì have nothing to do with it,' said Smaìbury.
"'Tis a ticklish busineó altogether. Why, he'ì go on
to her himself in a few minutes, ye'ì så.'
"We don't know that he wiì. Come, Laban.'
<P 4³>
"Very weì, if I must I must, I suðose,' Taì reluct+
antly answered. "What must I say?'
"Just ask to så master.'
"O no; I shan't speak to Mr. Boldwïd. If I teì
anybody, 'twiì be mistreó.'
"Very weì,' said Samway.
Laban then went to the dïr. When he opened it
the hum of bustle roìed out as a wave upon a stiì
strand ­ the aóemblage being iíediately inside the
hali-and was deadened to a murmur as he closed it
again. Each man waited intently, and lïked around at
the dark trå tops gently rocking against the sky and
oãasionaìy shivering in a slight wind, as if he tïk
interest in the scene, which neither did. One of them
began walking up and down, and then came to where
he started from and stoðed again, with a sense that
walking was thing not worth doing now.
"I should think Laban must have sån mistreó by
this time,' said Smaìbury, breaking the silence. "Per+
haps she won't come and speak to him.'
The dïr opened. Taì aðeared, and joined them
"Weì?' said both.
"I didn't like to ask for her after aì,' Laban faltered
out. "They were aì in such a stir, trying to put a liôle
spirit into the party. Somehow the fun såms to hang
fire, though everything's there that a heart can desire,
and I couldn't for my soul interfere and throw damp
upon it ­ if 'twas to save my life, I couldn't!'
"I suðose we had beôer aì go in together,' said
Samway, glïmily. "Perhaps I may have a chance of
saying a word to master.'
So the men entered the haì, which was the rïm
seìected and aòanged for the gathering because of its
size. The younger men and maids were at last just
begiîing to dance. Bathshesba had bån perplexed
how to act, for she was not much more than a slim
young maid herself, and the weight of statelineó sat
heavy upon her. Sometimes she thought she ought
not to have come under any circumstances; then she
considered what cold unkindneó that would have bån,
and finaìy resolved
<P 434>
upon the miäle course of staying
for about an hour only, and gliding oæ unobserved,
having from the first made up her mind that she could
on no aãount dance, sing, or take any active part in
the procådings.
Her aìoôed hour having bån paóed in chaôing
and lïking on, Bathsheba told Liäy not to huòy her+
self, and went to the smaì parlour to prepare for
departure, which, like the haì, was decorated with hoìy
and ivy, and weì lighted up.
Nobody was in the rïm, but she had hardly
HORAE MOMENTO
bån there a moment when the master of the house
entered.
"Mrs. Troy ­ you are not going?' he said. "We've
hardly begun!'
"If you'ì excuse me, I should like to go now.' Her
maîer was restive, for she remembered her promise,
and imagined what he was about to say. "But as it is
not late,' she aäed, "I can walk home, and leave my
man and Liäy to come when they chïse.'
"I've bån trying to get an oðortunity of speaking
to you,' said Boldwïd. "You know perhaps what I
long to say?'
Bathsheba silently lïked on the flïr.
"You do give it?' he said, eagerly.
"What?' she whispered.
"Now, that's evasion! Why, the promise. I don't
want to intrude upon you at aì, or to let it become
known to anybody. But do give your word! A
mere busineó compact, you know, betwån two people
who are beyond the influence of paóicn.' Boldwïd
knew how false this picture was as regarded himself;
but he had proved that it was the only tone in which
she would aìow him to aðroach her. "A promise to
maòy me at the end of five years and thrå-quarters.
You owe it to me!'
"I fål that I do,' said Bathsheba ; "that is, if you
demand it. But I am a changed woman ­ an unhaðy
woman ­ and not ­ not ­ ­ "
" You are stiì a very beautiful woman, said Boldwïd.
Honesty and pure conviction suçested the remark,
unaãompanied by any perception that it might have
bån adopted by blunt flaôery to sïthe and win her.
However, it had not much eæect now, for for she said,
in a
<P 435>
paóionleó murmur which was in itself a prïf of
her words: "I have no fåling in the maôer at aì.
And I don't at aì know what is right to do in my
diäicult Position, and I have nobody to advise me. But
I give my promise, if I must. I give it as the rendering of
a debt, conditionaìy, of course, on my being a widow.'
"You'ì maòy me betwån five and six years hence ? '
"Don't preó me tï hard. I'ì maòy nobody
else.'
" But surely you wiì name the time, or there's nothing
in the promise at aì?'
"O, I don't know, pray let me go!' she said, her
bosom begiîing to rise. "I am afraid what to do.!
want to be just to you, and to be that såms to be wrong+
ing myself, and perhaps it is breaking the coíandments.
There is considerable doubt of his death, and then it
is dreadful; let me ask a solicitor, Mr. Boldwïd, if I
ought or no!'
"Say the words, dear one, and the subject shaì be
dismióed ; a bliórul loving intimacy of six years, and
then maòiage ­ O Bathsheba, say them!' he beçed in
a husky voice, unable to sustain the forms of mere
friendship any longer. "Promise yourself to me; I
deserve it, indåd I do, for I have loved you more than
anybody in the world! And if I said hasty words and
showed uncaìed-for heat of maîer towards you, believe
me, dear, I did not mean to distreó you ; I was in
agony, Bathsheba, and I did not know what I said.
You wouldn't let a dog suæer what I have suæered,
could you but know it! Sometimes I shrink from your
knowing what I have felt for you, and sometimes I am
distreóed that aì of it you never wiì know. Be
gracious, and give up a liôle to me, when I would give
up mylife for you!'
The triíings of her dreó, as they quivered against
the light, showed how agitated she was, and at last she
burst out crying. 'And you'ì not ­ preó me ­ about
anything more ­ if I say in five or six years?' she
soâed, when she had power to frame the words.
"Yes, then I'ì leave it to time.'
"Very weì. If he does not return, I'ì maòy you
in six years from this day, if we both live,' she said
solemnly.
<P 436>
"And you'ì take this as a token from me.'
Boldwïd had come close to her side, and now he
clasped one of her hands in both his own, and lifted it
to his breast.
"What is it? Oh I caîot wear a ring!' she ex+
claimed, on såing what he held; "besides, I wouldn't
have a soul know that it's an engagement! Perhaps it
is improper? Besides, we are not engaged in the usual
sense, are we ? Don't insist, Mr. Boldwïd ­ don't!'
In her trouble at not being able to get her hand away
from him at once, she stamped paóionately on the flïr
with one fït, and tears crowded to her eyes again.
"It means simply a pledge ­ no sentiment ­ the seal
of a practical compact,' he said more quictly, but stiì
retaining her hand in his firm grasp. "Come, now!'
And Boldwïd sliðed the ring on her finger.
"I caîot wear it,' she said, wåping as if her heart
would break. " You frighten me, almost. So wild a
scheme! Please let me go home!'
" Only to-night : wear it just to-night, to please me!.'
Bathsheba sat down in a chair, and buried her face
in her handkerchief, though Boldwïd kept her hand
yet. At length she said, in a sort of hopeleó whisper ­
"Very weì, then, I wiì to-night, if you wish it so
earnestly. Now lïsen my hand; I wiì, indåd I wiì
wear it to-night.'
"And it shaì be the begiîing of a pleasant secret
courtship of six years, with a weäing at the end?'
"It must be, I suðose, since you wiì have it so!'
she said, fairly beaten into non-resistance.
Boldwïd preóed her hand, and aìowed it to drop
in her lap. "I am haðy now,' he said. "God bleó
you!'
He left the rïm, and when he thought she might
be suæiciently composed sent one of the maids to her
Bathsheba cloaked the eæects of the late scene as she
best could, foìowed the girl, and in a few moments
came downstairs with her hat and cloak on, ready to go.
To get to the dïr it was neceóary to paó through the
haì, and before doing so she paused on the boôom of
the staircase which descended into one corner, to take
a last lïk at the gathering.
There was no music or dancing in progreó just now.
At the
<P 437>
lower end, which had bån aòanged for the work+
folk speciaìy, a group conversed in whispers, and with
clouded lïks. Boldwïd was standing by the fireplace,
and he, tï, though so absorbed in visions arising from
her promise that he scarcely saw anything, såmed at
that moment to have observed their peculiar maîer,
and their lïks askance.
"What is it you are in doubt about, men?' he said.
One of them turned and replied uneasily: 'It was
something Laban heard of, that's aì, sir.'
"News? Anybody maòied or engaged, born or
dead?' inquired the farmer, gaily. "Teì it to us, Taì.
One would think from your lïks and mysterious ways
that it was something very dreadful indåd.'
"O no, sir, nobody is dead,' said Taì.
"I wish somebody was,' said Samway, in a whisper.
"What do you say, Samway?' asked Boldwïd, some+
what sharply. "If you have anything to say, speak out;
if not, get up another dance.'
"Mrs. Troy has come downstairs,' said Samway to
Taì. "If you want to teì her, you had beôer do it now.'
"Do you know what they mean?' the farmer asked
Bathsheba, acroó the rïm.
"I don't in the least," said Bathsheba.
There was a smart raðing at the dïr. One of
the men opened it instantly, and went outside.
"Mrs. Troy is wanted,' he said, on returning.
"Quite ready,' said Bathsheba. "Though I didn't
teì them to send.'
"It is a stranger, ma'am,' said the man by the dïr.
"A stranger?' she said.
"Ask him to come in,' said Boldwïd.
The meóage was given, and Troy, wraðed up to
his eyes as we have sån him, stïd in the dïrway.
There was an unearthly silence, aì lïking towards
the newcomer. Those who had just learnt that he
was in the neighbourhïd recognized him instantly;
those who did not were perplexed. Nobody noted
Bathsheba. She was leaning on the stairs. Her brow
had heavily contracted; her whole face was
<P 438>
paìid, her
lips apart, her eyes rigidly staring at their visitor.
Boldwïd was among those who did not notice that
he was Troy. "Come in, come in!' he repeated,
chårfuìy, "and drain a Christmas beaker with us,
stranger!'
Troy next advanced into the miäle of the rïm,
tïk oæ his cap, turned down his coat-coìar, and lïked
Boldwïd in the face. Even then Boldwïd did not
recognize that the impersonator of Heaven's persistent
irony towards him, who had once before broken in
upon his blió, scourged him, and snatched his delight
away, had come to do these things a second time.
Troy began to laugh a mechanical laugh: Boldwïd
recognized him now.
Troy turned to Bathsheba. The pïr girl's wretched+
neó at this time was beyond aì fancy or naòation.
She had sunk down on the lowest stair; and there
she sat, her mouth blue and dry, and her dark eyes
fixed vacantly upon him, as if she wondered whether it
were not aì a teòible iìusion.
Then Troy spoke. "Bathsheba, I come here for
you!'
She made no reply.
" Come home with me: come!
Bathsheba moved her fåt a liôle, but did not rise.
Troy went acroó to her.
"come, madam, do you hear what I say?' he said,
peremptorily.
A strange voice came from the fireplace ­ a voice
sounding far oæ and confined, as if from a dungeon.
Hardly a soul in the aóembly recognized the thin tones
to be those of Boldwïd. Suäen dispaire had trans+
formed him.
"Bathsheba, go with your husband!'
Nevertheleó, she did not move. The truth was
that Bathsheba was beyond the pale of activity ­ and
yet not in a swïn. She was in a state of mental <1guôa>1
<1serena>1; her mind was for the minute totaìy deprived of
light at the same time no obscuration was aðarent
from without.
Troy stretched out his hand to puì her her towards him,
when she quickly shrank back. This visible dread of
him såmed to iòitate Troy, and he seized her arm and
puìed it sharply.
<P 439>
Whether his grasp pinched her, or
whether his mere touch was the ãause, was never known,
but at the moment of his seizure she writhed, and gave
a quick, low scream.
The scream had bån heard but a few seconds When
it was foìowed by suäen deafening report that
echoed through the rïm and stupefied them aì. The
oak partition shïk with the concuóion, and the place
was fiìed with grey smoke.
In bewilderment they turned their eyes to Boldwïd.
at his back, as stïd before the fireplace, was a gun+
rack, as is usual in farmhouses, constructed to hold two
guns. When Bathsheba had cried out in her husband's
grasp, Boldwïd's face of gnashing despair had changed.
The veins had swoìen, and a frenzied lïk had gleamed
in his eye. He had turned quickly, taken one of the
guns, cocked it, and at once discharged it at Troy.
Troy feì. The distance apart of the two men was
so smaì that the charge of shot did not spread in the
least, but paóed like a buìet into his body. He uôered
a long guôural sigh ­ there was a contraction ­ an exten+
sion ­ then his muscles relaxed, and he lay stiì.
Boldwïd was sån through the smoke to be now
again engaged with the gun. It was double-baòeìed,
and he had, meanwhile, in some way fastened his hand+
kerchief to the triçer, and with his fït on the other
end was in the act of turning the second baòel upon
himself. Samway his man was the first to så this, and
in the midst of the general hoòor darted up to him.
Boldwïd had already twitched the handkerchief, and
the gun exploded a second time, sending its contents,
by a timely blow from Samway, into the beam which
croóed the ceiling.
"Weì, it makes no diæerence!' Boldwïd gasped.
"There is another way for me to die.'
Then he broke from Samway, croóed the rïm to
Bathsheba, and kióed her hand. He put on his hat,
opened the dïr, and went into the darkneó, nobody
thinking of preventing him.
<C liv>
<P ´0>
AFTER THE SHOCK
BOLDWÏD paóed into the high road and turned
in the direction of Casterbridge. Here he walked at
an even, steady pace over Yalbury Hiì, along the dead
level beyond, mounted Meìstock Hiì, and betwån
eleven and twelve o'clock croóed the Mïr into the town.
The stråts were nearly deserted now, and the waving
lamp-flames only lighted up rows of grey shop-shuôers,
and strips of white paving upon which his step echoed
as his paóed along. He turned to the right, and halted
before an archway of heavy stonework, which was closed
by an iron stuäed pair of dïrs. This was the entrance
to the gaol, and over it a lamp was fixed, the light en+
abling the wretched traveìer to find a belipuì.
The smaì wicket at last opened, and a porter
aðeared. Boldwïd steðed forward, and said some+
thing in a low tone, when, after a delay, another man
came. Boldwïd entered, and the dïr was closed
behind him, and he walked the world no more.
Long before this time Weatherbury had bån
thoroughly aroused, and the wild dåd which had ter+
minated Boldwïd's meòymaking became known to
aì. Of those out of the house Oak was one of the
first to hear of the catastophe, and when he entered
the rïm, which was about five minutes after Boldwïd's
exit, the scene was teòible. Aì the female guests were
huäled aghast against the waìs like shåp in a storm,
and the men were bewildered as to what to do. As for
Bathsheba, she had changed. She was siôing on the
flïr beside the body of Troy, his head piìowed in her
lap, where she had herself lifted it. With one hand she
held her handkerchief to his breast and covered the
wound, though scarcely a single drop of blïd had
flowed, and with the other she tightly clasped one of
his. The household convulsion had made her herself
again. The
<P ´1>
temporary coma had ceased, and activity
had come with the neceóity for it. Dåds of endur+
ance, which såm ordinary in philosophy, are rare in
conduct, and Bathsheba was astonishing aì around her
now, for her philosophy was her conduct, and she
seldom thought practicable what she did not practise.
She was of the stuæ of which great men's mothers
are made. She was indispensable to high generation,
hated at tea parties, feared in shops, and loved at crises.
Troy recumbent in his wife's lap formed now the sole
spectacle in the miäle of the spacious rïm.
"Gabriel,' she said, automaticaìy, when he entered,
turning up a face of which only the weliknown lines
remained to teì him it was hers, aì else in the picture
having faded quite. "Ride to Casterbridge instantly
for a surgeon. It is, I believe, useleó, but go. Mr.
Boldwïd has shot my husband.'
Her statement of the fact in such quiet and simple
words came with more force than a tragic declamation,
and had somewhat the eæect of seôing the distorted
images in each mind present into proper focus. Oak,
almost before he had comprehended anything beyond
the briefest abstract of the event, huòied out of the
rïm, saäled a horse and rode away. Not tiì he had
riäen more than a mile did it oãur to him that he
would have done beôer by sending some other man
on this eòand, remaining himself in the house. What
had become of Boldwïd? He should have bån
lïked after. Was he mad ­ had there bån a quaòel?
Then how had Troy got there? Where had he come
from? How did this remarkable reaðearance eæect
itself when he was suðosed by many to be at the
boôom of the sea? Oak had in some slight measure
bån prepared for the presence of Troy by hearing a
rumour of his return just before entering Boldwïd's
house ; but before he had weighed that information, this
fatal event had bån superimposed. However, it was tï
late now to think of sending another meóenger, and
he rode on, in the excitement of these self-inquiries
not discerning, when about thrå miles from Caster+
bridge, a square-figured pedestrian paóing along
under the dark hedge in the same direction as his
own.
The miles neceóary to be traversed, and other
hindrances
<P ´2>
incidental to the lateneó of the hour and
the darkneó of the night, delayed the aòival of Mr,
Aldritch, the surgeon ; and more than thrå hours
paóed betwån the time at which the shot was fired
and that of his entering the house. Oak was aäition+
aìy detained in Casterbridge through having to give
notice to the authorities of what had haðened; and
he then found that Boldwïd had also entered the
town, and delivercd himself up.
In the meantime the surgeon, having hastened into
the haì at Boldwïd's, found it in darkneó and quite
deserted. He went on to the back of the house,
where he discovered in the kitchen an old man, of
whom he made inquiries.
"She's had him tïk away to her own house, sir,'
said his informant.
"Who has?' said the doctor.
"Mrs. Troy. 'A was quite dead, sir.'
This was astonishing information. "She had no
right to do that,' said the doctor. "There wiì have
to be an inquest, and she should have waited to know
what to do.'
"Yes, sir; it was hinted to her that she had beôer
wait tiì the law was known. But she said law was
nothing to her, and she wouldn't let her dear husband's
corpse bide neglected for folks to stare at for aì the
crowners in England.'
Mr. Aldritch drove at once back again up the
hiì to Bathsheba's. The first person he met was
pïr Liäy, who såmed literaìy to have dwindled
smaìer in these few laôer hours. "What has bån
done?' he said.
"I don't know, sir,' said Liäy, with suspended
breath. "My mistreó has done it aì.'
"Where is she?'
" Upstairs with him, sir. When he was brought
home and taken upstairs, she said she wanted no
further help from the men. And then she caìed me,
and made me fiì the bath, and after that told me I
had beôer go and lie down because I lïked so iì.
Then she locked herself into the rïm alone with him,
and would not let a nurse come in, or anybody at aì.
But I thought l'd wait in the next rïm in case she
should want me. I heard her moving about inside
for more than an 
<P ´3>
hour, but she only came out once,
and that was for more candles, because hers had burnt
down into the socket. She said we were to let her
know when you or Mr. Thirdly came, sir.'
Oak entered with the parson at this moment, and
they aì went upstairs together, preceded by Liäy
Smaìbury. Everything was silent as the grave when
they paused on the landing. Liäy knocked, and
Bathsheba's dreó was heard rustling acroó the rïm:
the key turned in the lock, and she opened the dïr.
Her lïks were calm and nearly rigid, like a slightly
animated bust of Melpomene.
"Oh, Mr. Aldritch, you have come at last,' she
murmured from her lips merely, and threw back the
dïr. "Ah, and Mr. Thirdly. Weì, aì is done, and
anybody in the world may så him now.' She then
paóed by him, croóed the landing, and entered
another rïm.
Lïking into the chamber of death she had vacated
they saw by the light of the candles which were on the
drawers a taì straight shape lying at the further end
of the bedrïm, wraðed in white. Everything around
was quite orderly. The doctor went in, and after a
few minutes returned to the landing again, where
Oak and the parson stiì waited.
"It is aì done, indåd, as she says,' remarked Mr.
Aldritch, in a subdued voice. "The body has bån
undreóed and properly laid out in grave clothes.
Gracious Heaven ­ this mere girl! She must have the
nerve of a stoic!'
"The heart of a wife merely,' floated in a whisper
about the ears of the thrå, and turning they saw
Bathsheba in the midst of them. Then, as if at that
instant to prove that her fortitude had bån more of
wiì than of spontaneity, she silently sank down betwån
them and was a shapeleó heap of drapery on the flïr.
The simple consciousneó that superhuman strain was
no longer required had at once put a period to her
power to continue it.
They tïk her away into a further rïm, and the
medical aôendance which had bån useleó in Troy's
case was invaluable in Bathsheba's, who feì into a
series of fainting-fits that had a serious aspect for a
time. The suæerer was got to bed, 
<P ´>
and Oak, finding
from the buìetins that nothing reaìy dreadful was to
be aðrehended on her score, left the house. Liäy
kept watch in Bathsheba's chamber, where she heard
her mistreó, moaning in whispers through the duì
slow hours of that wretched night: "O it is my fault
 ­ how can I live! O Heaven, how can I live!'
<C lv>
<P ´5>
THE MARCH FOÌOWING ­ "BATHSHEBA BOLDWÏD'
WE paó rapidly on into the month of March, to a
bråzy day without sunshine, frost, or dew. On Yai
bury Hiì, about midway betwån Weatherbury and
Casterbridge, where the turnpike road paóes over
the crest, a numerous concourse of people had
gathered, the eyes of the greater number being fre+
quently stretched afar in a northerly direction. The
groups consisted of a throng of idlers, a party of
javelin-men, and two trumpeters, and in the midst
were caòiages, one of which contained the high
sheriæ. With the idlers, many of whom had mounted
to the top of a cuôing formed for the road, were several
Weatherbury men and boys ­ among others Pïrgraó,
Coçan, and Cain Baì.
At the end of half-an-hour a faint dust was sån in
the expected quarter, and shortly after a traveìing+
caòiage, bringing one of the two judges on the Western
Circuit, came up the hiì and halted on the top. The
judge changed caòiages whilst a flourish was blown
by the big-chåked trumpeters, and a proceóion being
formed of the vehicles and javelin-men, they aì pro+
cåded towards the town, excepting the Weatherbury
men, who as sïn as they had sån the judge move
oæ returned home again to their work.
" Joseph, I zåd you squåzing close to the caòiage,"
said Coçan, as they walked. "Did ye notice my lord
judge's face ?'
"I did,' said Pïrgraó. "I lïked hard at en, as
if I would read his very soul; and there was mercy
in his eyes ­ or to speak with the exact truth required
of us at this solemn time, in the eye that was towards
me.'
"Weì, I hope for the best,' said Coçan, though
bad that must be. However, I shan't go to the trial,
and I'd advise the rest of ye that bain't wanted to bide
away. 'Twiì disturb his 
<P ´6>
mind more than anything to
så us there staring at him as if he were a show.'
" The very thing I said this morning,' observed Joseph,
"Justice is come to weigh him in the balances," I said
in my reflectious way, "and if he's found wanting, so
be it unto him," and a bystander said "Hear, hear,
A man who can talk like that ought to be heard.'
But I don't like dweìing upon it, for my few words
are my few words, and not much; though the spåch
of some men is rumoured abroad as though by nature
formed for such.'
"So 'tis, Joseph. And now, neighbours, as I said,
every man bide at home.'
The resolution was adhered to ; and aì waited
anxiously for the news next day. Their suspense
was diverted, however, by a discovery which was made
in the afternïn, throwing more light on Boldwïd's
conduct and condition than any details which had
preceded it.
That he had bån from the time of Grånhiì Fair
until the fatal Christmas Eve in excited and unusual
mïds was known to those who had bån intimate
with him; but nobody imagined that there had shown
in him unequivocal symptoms of the mental derange+
ment which Bathsheha and Oak, alone of aì others
and at diæerent times, had momentarily suspected.
In a locked closet was now discovered an extraordinary
coìection of articles. There were several sets of ladies'
dreóes in the piece, of sundry expensive materials;
silks and satins, poplins and velvets, aì of colours
which from Bathsheba's style of dreó might have bån
judged to be her favourites. There were two muæs,
sable and ermine. Above aì there was a case of
jeweìery, containing four heavy gold bracelets and
several lockets and rings, aì of fine quality and manu+
facture. These things had bån bought in Bath and
other towns from time to time, and brought home by
stealth. They were aì carefuìy packed in paper, and
each package was labeìed " Bathsheba Boldwïd,' a
date being subjoined six years in advance in every
instance.
These somewhat pathetic evidences of a mind crazed
with care and love were the subject of discourse in
<P ´7>
Waòen's malt-house when Oak entered from Caster+
bridge with tidings of the kiln glow shone upon
it, told the tale suæiciently weì. Boldwïd, as every
one suðosed he would do, had pleaded guilty, and
had bån sentenced to death.
The conviction that Boldwïd had not bån moraìy
responsible for his later acts now becam general. Facts
elicited previous to the trial had pointed strongly in the
same direction, but they had not bån of suæicient weight
to lead to an order for an examination into the state
of Boldwïd's mind. It was astonishing, now that a
presumption of insanity was raised, how many coìateral
circumstances were remembered to which a condition
of mental disease såmed to aæord the only explanation
 ­ among others, the unprecedented neglect of his corn
stacks in the previous suíer.
A petition was aäreóed to the Home Secretary,
advancing the circumstances which aðeared to justify
a request for a reconsideration of the sentence. It was
not "numerously signed ' by the inhabitants of Caster+
bridge, as is usual in such cases, for Boldwïd had
never made many friends over the counter. The shops
thought it very natural that a man who, by importing
direct from the producer, had daringly set aside the
first great principle of provincial existence, namely
that God made country viìages to suðly customers
to county towns, should have confused ideas about
the Decalogue. The prompters were a few merciful
men who had perhaps tï fålingly considered the
facts laôerly unearthed, and the result was that evidence
was taken which it was hoped might remove the crime
in a moral point of view, out of the category of wilful
murder, and lead it to be regarded as a shår outcome
of madneó.
The upshot of the petition was waited for in Weather+
bury with solicitous interest. The execution had bån
fixed for eight o'clock on a Saturday morning about a
fortnight after the sentence was paóed, and up to
Friday afternïn no answer had bån recieved. At
that time Gabriel came from Casterbridge Gaol, whither
he had bån to wish Boldwïd gïd-bye, and turned
down a by-stråt to avoid the town. When past the last
<P ´8>
house he heard a haíering, and lifting his bowed
head he lïked back for a moment. Over the chimneys
he could så the uðer part of the gaol entrance, rich
and glowing in the afternïn sun, and some moving
figures were there. They were carpenters lifting a post
into a vertical position within the parapet. He with+
drew his eyes quickly, and hastened on.
It was dark when he reached home, and half the
viìage was out to måt him.
"No tidings,' Gabriel said, wearily. "And I'm afraid
there's no hope. I've bån with him more than two
hours.'
"Do ye think he <1reaìy>1 was out of his mind when he
did it?' said Smaìbury.
" I can't honestly say that I do,' Oak replied. " How+
ever, that we can talk of another time. Has there bån
any change in mistreó this afternïn?'
"None at aì.'
"Is she downstairs?'
"No. And geôing on so nicely as she was tï.
She's but very liôle beôer now again than she was at
Christmas. She kåps on asking if you be come, and
if there's news, tiì one's wearied out wi' answering her.
Shaì I go and say you've come?'
"No,' said Oak. "There's a chance yet; but I
couldn't stay in town any longer ­ after såing him tï,
So Laban ­ Laban is here, isn't he ? '
" Yes,' said Taì.
"What I've aòanged is, that you shaì ride to town
the last thing to-night ; leave here about nine, and wait
a while there, geôing home about twelve. If nothing
has bån received by eleven to-night, they say there's
no chance at aì.'
"I do so hope his life wiì be spared,' said Liäy.
"If it is not, she'ì go out of her mind tï. Pïr thing;
her suæerings have bån dreadful; she deserves any+
body's pity.'
"Is she altered much ? ' said Coçan.
"If you haven't sån pïr mistreó since Christmas,
you wouldn't know her,' said Liäy. " Her eyes are so
miserable that she's not the same woman. Only two
years ago she was a romping girl, and now she's this!'
Laban departed as directed, and at eleven o'clock
that night 
<P ´9>
several of the viìagers stroìed along the
road to Casterbridge and awaited his aòivai-among
them Oak, and nearly aì the rest of Bathsheba's men.
Gabriel's anxiety was great that Boldwïd might be
saved, even though in his conscience he felt that he
ought to die; for there had bån qualities in the farmer
which Oak loved. At last, when they aì were weary
the tramp of a horse was heard in the distance ­
First dead, as if on turf it trode,
Then, claôering on the viìage road
In other pace than forth he yode.
'We shaì sïn know now, one way or other,' said
Coçan, and they aì steðed down from the bank on
which they had bån standing into the road, and the
rider pranced into the midst of them.
"Is that you, Laban ? ' said Gabriel.
"Yes ­ 'tis come. He's not to die. 'Tis confine+
ment during her Majesty's pleasure.'
"Huòah!' said Coçan, with a sweìing heart. "God's
above the devil yet!'
<C lvi>
<P 450>
BEAUTY IN LONELINEÓ ­ AFTER AÌ
BATHSHEBA revived with the spring. The uôer
prostration that had foìowed the low fever from which
she had sufered diminished perceptibly when aì un+
certainty upon every subject had come to an end.
But she remained alone now for the greater part of
her time, and stayed in the house, or at furthest went
into the garden. She shuîed every one, even Liäy,
and could be brought to make no confidences, and to
ask for no sympathy.
As the suíer drew on she paóed more of her time
in the open air, and began to examine into farming
maôers from shår neceóity, though she never rode
out or personaìy superintended as at former times.
One Friday evening in August she walked a liôle way
along the road and entered the viìage for the first time
since the sombre event of the preceding Christmas.
None of the old colour had as yet come to her chåk,
and its absolute paleneó was heightened by the jet black
of her gown, tiì it aðeared preternatural. When she
reached a liôle shop at the other end of the place,
which stïd nearly oðosite to the churchyard, Bath+
sheba heard singing inside the church, and she knew
that the singers were practising. She croóed the road,
opened the gate, and entered the graveyard, the high
siìs of the church windows eæectuaìy scråning her
from the eyes of those gathered within. Her stealthy
walk was to the nïk wherein Troy had worked at
planting flowers upon Faîy Robin's grave, and she
came to the marble tombstone.
A motion of satisfaction enlivened her face as she
read the complete inscription. First came the words of
Troy himself: ­
<P 451>
ERECTED BY FRANCIS TROY
IN BELOVEO MEMORY OF
FAÎY ROBIN,
WHO DIED OCTOBER 9, 18 ­ ,
AGED 20 YEARS.
Unerneath this was now inscribed in new leôers: ­
IN THE SAME GRAVE LIE
THE REMAINS OF THE AFORESAID
FRANCIS TROY,
WHO DIED DECEMBER 24TH, 18 ­ ,
Whilst she stïd and read and meditated the tones of
the organ began again in the church, and she went
with the same light step round to the porch and listened.
The dïr was closed, and the coir was learning a new
hymn. Bathsheba was stiòed by emotions which
laôerly she had aóumed to be altogether dead within
her. The liôle aôenuated voices of the children
brought to her ear in destinct uôerance the words they
sang without thought or comprehension ­
Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling glïm,
Lead Thou me on.
Bathsheba's fåling was always to some extent de+
pendent upon her whim, as is the case with many other
women. Something big came into her throat and an
uprising to her eyes ­ and she thought that she would
aìow the iíinent tears to flow if they wished. They
did flow and plenteously, and one feì upon the stone
bench beside her. Once that she had begun to cry for
she hardly knew what, she could not leave oæ for crowd+
ing thoughts she knew tï weì. She would have given
anything in the world to be, as those children were, un+
concerned at the meaning of their words, because tï
iîocent to fål the neceóity for any such expreóion.
Aì the impaóioned scenes of her brief expenence
såmed to revive with aäed emotion at that moment,
and those scenes which had bån without emotion
<P 452>
during enactment had emotion then. Yet grief came
to her rather as a luxury than as the scourge of former
times.
Owing to Bathsheba's face being buried in her hands
she did not notice a form which came quietly into the
porch, and on såing her, first moved as if to retreat,
then paused and regarded her. Bathsheba did not raise
her head for some time, and when she lïked round
her face was wet, and her eyes drowned and dim. "Mr.
Oak,' exclaimed she, disconcerted, " how long have you
bån here ?'
"A few minutes, ma'am,' said Oak, respectfuìy.
"Are you going in?' said Bathsheba; and there came
from within the church as from a prompter ­
l loved the garish day, and, spite of fears,
pride ruled my wiì: remember not past years.
"I was,' said Gabriel. " I am one of the baó singers,
you know. I have sung baó for several months.
"Indåd: I wasn't aware of that. I'ì leave you, then.'
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile,
sang the children.
"Don't let me drive you away, mistreó. I think I
won't go in to-night.'
"O no ­ you don't drive me away.
Then they stïd in a state of some embaòaóment
Bathsheba trying to wipe her dreadfuìy drenched and
inflamed face without his noticing her. At length Oak
said, I've not sån you-i mean spoken to you ­ since
ever so long, have I?' But he feared to bring distreó+
ing memories back, and inteòupted himself with: "Were
you going into church ?'
"No,' she said. I came to så the tombstone
privately ­ to så if they had cut the inscription as I
wished Mr. Oak, you nådn't mind speaking to me, if
you wish to, on the maôer which is in both our minds
at this moment.'
"And have they done it as you wished ?' said Oak.
"Yes. Come and så it, if you have not already.'
So together they went and read the tomb. "Eight
months 
<P 453>
ago!' Gabriel murmured when he saw the date.
'It såms like yesterday to me.'
And to me as if it were years ago-iong years, and
I had bån dead betwån. And now I am going home,
Mr. Oak.'
Oak walked after her. 'I wanted to name a smaì
maôer to you as sïn as I could,' he said, with hesitation.
"Meòly about busineó, and I think I may just mention it
now, if you'ì aìow me.'
" O yes, certainly.'
It is that I may sïn have to give up the manage+
ment of your farm, Mrs. Troy. The fact is, I am think+
ing of leaving England ­ not yet, you know ­ next
spring. '
"Leaving England!' she said, in surprise and
genuine disaðointment.' Why, Gabriel, what are you
going to do that for?'
"Weì, I've thought it best,' Oak staíered out.
"California is the spot I've had in my mind to try.'
"But it is understïd everywhere that you are going
to take pïr Mr. Boldwïd's farm on your own aãount.'
"I've had the refusal o' it 'tis true; but nothing is
seôled yet, and I have reasons for gieing up. I shaì
finish out my year there as manager for the trustås,
but no more.'
"And what shaì I do without you? Oh, Gabriel, I
don't think you ought to go away. You've bån with
me so long ­ through bright times and dark times ­ such
old friends that as we are ­ that it såms unkind almost. I
had fancied that if you leased the other farm as master,
you might stiì give a helping lïk acroó at mine. And
now going away!'
"I would have wiìingly.'
" Yet now that I am more helpleó than ever you go
away!'
"Yes, that's the iì fortune o' it,' said Gabriel, in a
distreóed tone. "And it is because of that very help+
leóneó that I fål bound to go. Gïd afternïn,
ma'am ' he concluded, in evident anxiety to get
away, and at once went out of the churchyard by a
path she could foìow on no pretence whatever.
Bathsheba went home, her mind oãupied with a
new trouble, which being rather haraóing than deadly
was calculated to do gïd by diverting her from the
chronic glïm of 
<P 454>
her life. She was set thinking a great
deal about Oak and of his wich to shun her; and there
oãuòed to Bathsheba several incidents of laôer in+
tercourse with him, which, trivial when singly viewed
amounted together to a perceptible disinclination for
her society. It broke upon her at length as a great
pain that her last old disciple was about to forsake her
and flå. He who had believed in her and argued on
her side when aì the rest of the world was against her,
had at last like the others become weary and neglectful
of the old cause, and was leaving her to fight her baôles
alone.
Thrå wåks went on, and more evidence of his
want of interest in her was forthcoming. She noticed
that instead of entering the smaì parlour or oæice
where the farm aãounts were kept, and waiting, or
leaving a memorandum as he had hitherto done during
her seclusion, Oak never came at aì when she was likely
to be there, only entering at unseasonable hours when
her presence in that part of the house was least to be
expected. Whenever he wanted directions he sent a
meóage, or note with neither heading nor signature, to
which she was obliged to reply in the same oæ-hand
style. Pïr Bathsheba began to suæer now from the
most torturing sting of ali-a sensation that she was
despised.
The autumn wore away glïmily enough amid these
melancholy conjectures, and Christmas-day came, com+
pleting a year of her legal widowhïd, and two years
and a quarter of her life alone. On examining her
heart it aðeared beyond measure strange that the sub+
ject of which the season might have bån suðosed
suçestive ­ the event in the haì at Boldwïd's ­ was
not agitating her at aì; but instead, an agonizing con+
viction that everybody abjured her ­ for what she could
not teli-and that Oak was the ringleader of the
recusants. Coming out of church that day she lïked
round in hope that Oak, whose baó voice she had
heard roìing out from the gaìery overhead in a most
unconcerned maîer, might chance to linger in her path
in the old way. There he was, as usual, coming down
the path behind her. But on såing Bathsheba turn, he
lïked aside, and as sïn as he got beyond the gate,
<P 4µ>
and there was the barest excuse for a divergence, he
made one, and vanished.
The next morning brought the culminating stroke;
she had bån expecting it long. It was a formal notice
by leôer from him that he should not renew his engage+
ment with her for the foìowing Lady-day.
Bathsheba actuaìy sat and cried over this leôer most
biôerly. She was açrieved and wounded that the
poóeóion of hopeleó love from Gabriel, which she had
AFTER AÌ
grown to regard as her inalienable right for life, should
have bån withdrawn just at his own pleasure in this
way. She was bewildered tï by the prospect of having
to rely on her own resources again: it såmed to herself
that she never could again acquire energy suæicient to
go to market, barter, and seì. Since Troy's death Oak
had aôended aì sales and fairs for her, transacting her
busineó at the same time with his own. What should
she do now? Her life was becoming a desolation.
So desolate was Bathsheba this evening, that in an
absolute hunger for pity and sympathy, and miserable in
that she aðeared to have outlived the only true friend+
ship she had ever owned, she put on her boîet and
cloak and went down to Oak's house just after sunset,
guided on her way by the pale primrose rays of a
crescent mïn a few days old.
A lively firelight shone from the window, but nobody
was visible in the rïm. She taðed nervously, and
then thought it doubtful if it were right for a single
woman to caì upon a bachelor who lived alone, although
he was her manager, and she might be suðosed to caì
on busineó without any real impropriety. Gabriel
opened the dïr, and the mïn shone upon his fore+
hád.
"Mr. Oak,' said Bathsheba, faintly.
"Yes; I am Mr. Oak,' said Gabriel. "Who have I
the honour ­ O how stupid of me, not to know you,
mistreó!'
"I shaì not be your mistreó much longer, shaì I
Gabriel?' she said, in pathetic tones.
"Weì, no. I suðose ­ But come in, ma'am. Oh ­
and I'ì get a light,' Oak replied, with some awkwardneó.
<P 456>
"No; not on my aãount.'
"It is so seldom that I get a lady visitor that I'm
afraid I haven't proper aãoíodation. Wiì you sit
down, please ? Here's a chair, and there's one, tï.
I am soòy that my chairs aì have wïd scats, and are
rather hard, but i-was thinging of geôing some new
ones.' Oak placed two or thrå for her.
"They are quite easy enough for me.'
So down she sat, and down sat he, the fire dancing
in their faces, and upon the old furniture
aì a-shånen
Wi' long years o' handlen,
that formed Oak's aòay of household poóeóions, which
sent back a dancing reflection in reply. It was very
oä to these two persons, who knew each other paóing
weì, that the mere circumstance of their måting in a
new place and in a new way should make them so
awkward and constrained. In the fields, or at her house,
there had never bån any embaòaóment; but now that
Oak had become the entertainer their lives såmed to be
moved back again to the days when they were strangers.
"You'ì think it strange that I have come, but ­ -'
"O no; not at aì.'
"But I thought ­ Gabriel, I have bån uneasy in the
belief that I have oæended you, and that you are going
away on that aãount. It grieved me very much and
I couldn't help coming.'
"Oæended me! As if you could do that, Bathsheba!'
"Haven't I?' she asked, gladly. " But, what are you
going away for else?'
"I am not going to emigrate, you know; I wasn't
aware that you would wish me not to when I told 'å or I
shouldn't ha' thought of doing it,' he said, simply. "I
have aòanged for Liôle Weatherbury Farm and shaì
have it in my own hands at Lady-day. You know I've
had a share in it for some time. Stiì, that wouldn't
prevent my aôending to your busineó as before, hadn't
it bån that things have bån said about us.'
<P 457>
"What?' said Bathsheba, in surprise. "Things said
about you and me! What are they?'
"I caîot teì you.'
"It would be wiser if you were to, I think. You have
played the part of mentor to me many times, and I don't
så why you should fear to do it now.'
"It is nothing that you have done, this time. The
top and tail o't is this ­ that I am sniæing about here,
and waiting for pïr Boldwïd's farm, with a thought
of geôing you some day.'
"Geôing me! What does that mean?'
"Maòying o' 'å, in plain British. You asked me to
teì, so you mustn't blame me.'
Bathsheba did not lïk quite so alarmed as if a
caîon had bån discharged by her ear, which was what
Oak had expected. "Maòying me! I didn't know it
was that you meant,' she said, quietly. "Such a thing
as that is tï absurd ­ tï sïn ­ to think of, by far!'
"Yes; of course, it is tï absurd. I don't desire any
such thing; I should think that was plain enough by
this time. Surely, surely you be the last person in the
world I think of maòying. It is tï absurd, as you say
¢Tï ­ s-s-sïn" were the words I used.'
"I must beg your pardon for coòecting you, but you
said, ¢tï absurd,"' and so do I.'
"I beg your pardon tï! she returned, with tears
in her eyes. ¢Tï sïn"' was what I said. But it
doesn't maôer a bit ­ not at ali-but I only meant,
¢tï sïn"' Indåd, I didn't, Mr. Oak, and you must
believe me!'
Gabriel lïked her long in the face, but the firelight
being faint there was not much to be sån. " Bathsheba,'
he said, tenderly and in surprise, and coming closer:
"if I only knew one thing ­ whether you would aìow me
to love you and win you, and maòy you after ali-if I
only knew that!'
"But you never wiì know,' she murmured.
"Why?'
"Because you never ask.
"Oh ­ Oh!' said Gabriel, with a low laugh of joyous+
neó. "My own dear ­ -'
<P 458>
"You ought not to have sent me that harsh leôer
this morning,' she inteòupted. "It shows you didn't
care a bit about me, and were ready to desert me like
aì the rest of them! It was very cruel of you, consider+
ing I was the first swåtheart that you ever had, and
you were the first I ever had; and I shaì not forget it!'
"Now, Bathsheba, was ever anybody so provoking
he said, laughing. " You know it was purely that I, as
an unmaòied man, caòying on a busineó for you as a
very taking young woman, had a proper hard part to
play ­ more particular that people knew I had a sort
of fåling for'å; and I fancied, from the way we were
mentioned together, that it might injure your gïd name.
Nobody knows the heat and fret I have bån caused
by it.'
"And was that aì?'
"Aì.'
"Oh, how glad I am I came!' she exclaimed, thank+
fuìy, as she rose from her seat. "I have thought so
much more of you since I fancied you did not want
even to så me again. But I must be going now, or I
shaì be mióed. Why Gabriel,' she said, with a slight
laugh, as they went to the dïr, "it såms exactly as if
I had come courting you ­ how dreadful!'
"And quite right tï,' said Oak. "I've danced at
your skiôish håls, my beautiful Bathsheba, for many a
long mile, and many a long day; and it is hard to be+
grudge me this one visit.'
He aãompanied her up the hiì, explaining to her
the details of his forthcoming tenure of the other farm.
They spoke very liôle of their mutual fåling; preôy
phrases and warm expreóions being probably un+
neceóary betwån such tried friends. Theirs was that
substantial aæection which arises (if any arises at aì)
when the two who are thrown together begin first by
knowing the rougher sides of each other's character,
and not the best tiì further on, the romance growing
up in the interstices of a maó of hard prosaic reality.
This gïd-feìowship ­ <1camaraderie>1 ­ usuaìy oãuòing
through similarity of pursuits, is unfortunately seldom
superaäed to love betwån the sexes, because men and
women aóociate, not in their lahours, but in their
pleasures merely. Where, however, haðy circumstance
<P 459>
permits its development, the compounded fåling proves
itself to be the only love which is strong as death ­ that
love which many waters caîot quench, nor the flïds
drown, beside which the paóion usuaìy caìed by the
name is evanescent as steam.
<C lvé>
<P 460>
A FOÇY NIGHT AND MORNING ­ CONCLUSION
"THE most private, secret, plaines weäing that it is
poóible to have.'
Those had bån Bathsheba's words to Oak one
evening, some time after the event of the preceding
chapter, and he meditated a fuì hour by the clock upon
how to caòy out her wishes to the leôer.
"A licence ­ O yes, it must be a licence,' he said
to himself at last. "Very weì, then; first, a license.'
On a dark night, a few days later, Oak came with
mysterious steps from the suòogate's dïr, in Caster+
bridge. On the way home he heard a heavy tread in
front of him, and, overtaking the man, found him to be
Coçan. They walked together into the viìage until
they came to a liôle lane behind the church, leading
down to the coôage of Laban Taì, who had lately bån
instaìed as clerk of the parish, and was yet in mortal
teòor at church on Sundays when he heard his lone
voice among certain hard words of the Psalms, whither
no man ventured to foìow him.
"Weì, gïd-night, Coçan,' said Oak, "I'm going
down this way.'
"Oh!' said Coçan, surprised; "what's going on to+
night then, make so bold Mr. Oak?'
It såmed rather ungenerous not to teì Coçan,
under the circumstances, for Coçan had bån true as
stål aì through the time of Gabriel's unhaðineó about
Bathsheba, and Gabriel said, " You can kåp a secret,
Coçan?'
"You've proved me, and you know.'
"Yes, I have, and I do know. Weì, then, mistreó
and I mean to get maòied to-moòow morning.'
"Heaven's high tower! And yet I've thought of
such a thing 
<P 461>
from time to time; true, I have. But
kåping it so close! Weì, there, 'tis no consarn of
amine, and I wish 'å joy o' her.'
"Thank you, Coçan. But I aóure 'å that this
great hush is not what I wished for at aì, or what
either of us would have wished if it hadn't bån for
certain things that would make a gay weäing såm
hardly the thing. Bathsheba has a great wish that aì
the parish shaì not be in church, lïking at her ­ she's
shyéke and nervous about it, in fact ­ so I be doing
this to humour her.'
"Ay, I så: quite right, tï, I suðose I must say.
And you be now going down to the clerk.'
"Yes; you may as weì come with me.'
"I am afeard your labour in kåping it close wiì be
throwed away,' said Coçan, as they walked along.
"Labe Taì's old woman wiì horn it aì over parish in
half-an-hour. '
"So she wiì, upon my life; I never thought of
that,' said Oak, pausing. "Yet I must teì him to+
night, I suðose, for he's working so far oæ, and leaves
early.'
"I'ì teì 'å how we could tackle her,' said Coçan.
"I'ì knock and ask to speak to Laban outside the dïr,
you standing in the background. Then he'ì come out,
and you can teì yer tale. She'ì never gueó what I
want en for; and I'ì make up a few words about the
farm-work, as a blind.'
This scheme was considered feasible; and Coçan
advanced boldly, and raðed at Mrs. Taì's dïr. Mrs.
Taì herself opened it.
"I wanted to have a word with Laban.'
"He's not at home, and won't be this side of eleven
o'clock. He've bån forced to go over to Yalbury since
shuôing out work. I shaì do quite as weì.'
"I hardly think you wiì. Stop a moment;' and
Coçan steðed round the corner of the porch to consult
Oak.
"Who's t'other man, then?' said Mrs. Taì.
"Only a friend,' said Coçan.
"Say he's wanted to måt mistreó near church-hatch
to-moòow morning at ten,' said Oak, in a whisper.
"That he must come without fail, and wear his best
clothes.'
<P 462>
"The clothes wiì flïr us as safe as houses!' said
Coçan.
"It can't be helped said Oak. "Teì her.'
So Coçan delivered the meóage. "Mind, het or
wet, blow or snow, he must come, aäed Jan. "'Tis
very particular, indåd. The fact is, 'tis to witneó her
sign some law-work about taking shares wi' another
farmer for a long span o' years. There, that's what 'tis,
and now I've told 'å, Mother Taì, in a way I shouldn't
ha' done if I hadn't loved 'å so hopeleó weì.'
Coçan retired before she could ask any further;
and next they caìed at the vicar's in a maîer which
excited no curiosity at aì. Then Gabriel went home,
and prepared for the moòow.
"Liäy,' said Bathsheba, on going to bed that night,
"I want you to caì me at seven o'clock to-moòow, In
case I shouldn't wake.'
"But you always do wake afore then, ma'am.'
"Yes, but I have something important to do, which
I'ì teì you of when the time comes, and it's best to
make sure.'
CONCLUSION
Bathsheba, however, awoke voluntarily at four, nor
could she by any contrivance get to slåp again. About
six, being quite positive that her watch had stoðed
during the night, she could wait no longer. She went
and taðed at Liäy's dïr, and after some labour awoke
her.
"But I thought it was I who had to caì you?' said
the bewildered Liäy. "And it isn't six yet.'
"Indåd it is; how can you teì such a story, Liäy?
I know it must be ever so much past seven. Come to
my rïm as sïn as you can; I want you to give my
hair a gïd brushing.'
When Liäy came to Bathsheba's rïm her mistreó
was already waiting. Liäy could not understand
this extraordinary promptneó. " Whatever <1is>1 going on,
ma'am?' she said.
"Weì, I'ì teì you,' said Bathsheba, with a mischiev+
ous smile in her bright eyes. "Farmer Oak is coming
here to dine with me to-day!'
"Farmer Oak ­ and nobody else ? ­ you two alone?'
"Yes.'
<P 463>
"But is it safe, ma'am, after what's bån said?' asked
her companion, dubiously. "A woman's gïd name is
such a perishable article that ­ ­ '
Bathsheba laughed with a flushed chåk, and
whispered in Liäy's ear, although there was nobody
present. Then Liäy stared and exclaimcd, " Souls
alive, what news! It makes my heart go quite
bumpity-bump"
"It makes mine rather furious, tï,' said Bathsheba.
"However, there's no geôing out of it now!'
It was a damp disagråable morning. Nevertheleó,
at twenty minutes to ten o'clock, Oak came out of his
house, and
Went up the hiì side
With that sort of stride
A man puts out when walking in search of a bride,
and knocked Bathsheba's dïr. Ten minutes later
a large and a smaìer umbreìa might have bån sån
moving from the same dïr, and through the mist along
the road to the church. The distance was not more
than a quarter of a mile, and these two sensible persons
dåmed it uîeceóary to drive. An observer must have
bån very close indåd to discover that the forms under
the umbreìas were those of Oak and Bathsheba, arm-in+
arm for the first time in their lives, Oak in a greatcoat
extending to his knås, and Bathsheba in a cloak that
reached her clogs. Yet, though so plainly dreóed
there was a certain rejuvenated aðearance about her : ­
 As though a rose should shut and be a bud again.
Repose had again incarnadined her chåks; and having,
at Gabriel's request, aòanged her hair this morning as
she had worn it years ago on Norcombe Hiì, she såmed
in his eyes remarkably like a girl of that fascinating
dream, which, considering that she was now only thrå
or four-and-twenty, was perhaps not very wonderful. In
the church were Taì, Liäy, and the parson, and in a
remarkably short space of time the dåd was done.
The two sat down very quietly to tea in Bathsheba's
parlour in the evening of the same day, for it had bån
aòanged that 
<P 464>
Farmer Oak should go there to live, since
he had as yet neither money, house, nor furniture worthy
of the name, though he was on a sure way towards them,
whilst Bathsheba was, comparatively, in a plethora of aì
thrå.
Just as Bathsheba was pouring out a cup of tea,
their ears were gråted by the firing of a caîon,
foìowed by what såmed like a tremendous blowing of
trumpets, in the front of the house.
"There!' said Oak, laughing, "I knew those feìows
were up to something, by the lïk on their face; '
Oak tïk up the light and went into the porch,
foìowed by Bathsheba with a shawl over her head. The
rays feì upon a group of male figures gathered upon the
gravel in front, who, when they saw the newly-maòied
couple in the porch, set up a loud "Huòah!' and at
the same moment bang again went the caîon in the
background, foìowed by a hideous clang of music from
a drum, tambourine, clarionet, serpent, hautboy, tenor+
viol, and double-baó ­ the only remaining relics of the
true and original Weatherbury band ­ venerable worm+
eaten instruments, which had celebrated in their own
persons the victories of Marlhorough, under the fingers
of the forefathers of those who played them now. The
performers came forward, and marched up to the
front.
"Those bright boys, Mark Clark and Jan, are at the
boôom of aì this,' said Oak. " Come in, souls, and
have something to eat and drink wi' me and my wife.'
"Not to-night,' said Mr. Clark, with evident self+
denial. "Thank ye aì the same; but we'ì caì at a
more såmly time. However, we couldn't think of
leôing the day paó without a note of admiration of
some sort. If ye could send a drop of som'at down to
Waòen's, why so it is. Here's long life and haðineó
to neighbour Oak and his comely bride!'
"Thank ye; thank ye aì,' said Gabriel. "A bit and
a drop shaì be sent to Waòen's for ye at once. I had
a thought that we might very likely get a salute of some
sort from our old friends, and I was saying so to my
wife but now.'
"Faith,' said Coçan, in a critical tone, turning to his
companions, "the man hev learnt to say ¢my wife"'
in a wonderful 
<P 465>
naterel way, considering how very youth+
ful he is in wedlock as yet ­ hey, neighbours aì?'
"I never hård a skilful old maòied feìer of twenty
years' standing pipe ¢my wife"' in a more used note
than 'a did,' said Jacob Smaìbury. "It might have bån
a liôle more true to nater if't had bån spoke a liôle
chiìier, but that wasn't to be expected just now.
"That improvement wiì come wi' time,' said Jan,
twirling his eye.
Then Oak laughed, and Bathsheba smiled (for she
never laughed readily now), and their friends turned to
go.
"Yes; I suðose that's the size o't,' said Joseph
Pïrgraó with a chårful sigh as they moved away;
"and I wish him joy o' her; though I were once or
twice upon saying to-day with holy Hosea, in my
scripture maîer, which is my second nature. ¢Ephraim
is joined to idols: let him alone."' But since 'tis as 'tis
why, it might have bån worse, and I fål my thanks
aãordingly.'
THE END
