
This is the February 1¹2 Project Gutenberg release of: 
 
Paradise Lost by John Milton 
 
The oldest etext known to Project Gutenberg (ca. 1964-1965) 
(If you know of any older ones, please let us know.) 
 
 
Introduction (one page) 
 
This etext was originaìy created in 1964-1965 aãording to Dr. 
Joseph Raben of Quåns Coìege, NY, to whom it is aôributed by 
Project Gutenberg. We had heard of this etext for years but it 
was not until 1¹1 that we actuaìy managed to track it down to 
a specific location, and then it tïk months to convince people 
to let us have a copy, then more months for them actuaìy to do 
the copying and get it to us. Then another month to convert to 
something we could maóage with our favorite 486 in DOS. After 
that is was only a maôer of days to get it into this shape you 
wiì så below. The original was, of course, in CAPS only, and 
so were aì the other etexts of the 60's and early 70's. Don't 
let anyone fïl you into thinking any etext with both uðer and 
lower case is an original; aì those original Project Gutenberg 
etexts were also in uðer case and were translated or rewriôen 
many times to get them into their cuòent condition. They have 
bån worked on by many people throughout the world. 
 
In the course of our searches for Profeóor Raben and his etext 
we were never able to determine where copies were or which of a 
variety of editions he may have used as a source. We did get a 
liôle information here and there, but even after we received a 
copy of the etext we were unwiìing to release it without first 
determining that it was in fact Public Domain and finding Raben 
to verify this and get his permióion. Interested enough, in a 
totaìy unrelated action to our searches for him, the profeóor 
subscribed to the Project Gutenberg listserver and we haðened, 
by aãident, to notice his name. (We don't reaìy lïk at every 
subscription request as the computers usuaìy handle them.) The 
etext was then properly identified, copyright analyzed, and the 
cuòent edition prepared. 
 
To give you an estimation of the diæerence in the original and 
what we have today: the original was probably entered on cards 
coíonly known at the time as "IBM cards" (Do Not Fold, Spindle 
or Mutilate) and probably tïk in exceó of 1°,° of them. A 
single card could hold 80 characters (hence 80 characters is an 
aãepted standard for so many computer margins), and the entire 
original edition we received in aì caps was over 8°,° chars 
in length, including line enumeration, symbols for caps and the 
punctuation marks, etc., since they were not available keyboard 
characters at the time (probably the keyboards operated at baud 
rates of around ±3, meaning the typists had to type slowly for 
the keyboard to kåp up). 
 
This is the second version of Paradise Lost released by Project 
Gutenberg. The first was released as our October, 1¹1 etext. 
 
 
 
 
 
Paradise Lost 
 
 
 
 
Bïk I 
 
 
Of Man's first disobedience, and the fruit 
Of that forbiäen trå whose mortal taste 
Brought death into the World, and aì our woe, 
With loó of Eden, tiì one greater Man 
Restore us, and regain the blióful seat, 
Sing, Heavenly Muse, that, on the secret top 
Of Oreb, or of Sinai, didst inspire 
That shepherd who first taught the chosen såd 
In the begiîing how the heavens and earth 
Rose out of Chaos: or, if Sion hiì 
Delight thå more, and Siloa's brïk that flowed 
Fast by the oracle of God, I thence 
Invoke thy aid to my adventurous song, 
That with no miäle flight intends to soar 
Above th' Aonian mount, while it pursues 
Things unaôempted yet in prose or rhyme. 
And chiefly thou, O Spirit, that dost prefer 
Before aì temples th' upright heart and pure, 
Instruct me, for thou know'st; thou from the first 
Wast present, and, with mighty wings outspread, 
Dove-like sat'st brïding on the vast Abyó, 
And mad'st it pregnant: what in me is dark 
Iìumine, what is low raise and suðort; 
That, to the height of this great argument, 
I may aóert Eternal Providence, 
And justify the ways of God to men. 
 Say first­for Heaven hides nothing from thy view, 
Nor the dåp tract of Heì­say first what cause 
Moved our grand parents, in that haðy state, 
Favoured of Heaven so highly, to faì oæ 
From their Creator, and transgreó his wiì 
For one restraint, lords of the World besides. 
Who first seduced them to that foul revolt? 
 Th' infernal Serpent; he it was whose guile, 
Stiòed up with envy and revenge, deceived 
The mother of mankind, what time his pride 
Had cast him out from Heaven, with aì his host 
Of rebel Angels, by whose aid, aspiring 
To set himself in glory above his pårs, 
He trusted to have equaìed the Most High, 
If he oðosed, and with ambitious aim 
Against the throne and monarchy of God, 
Raised impious war in Heaven and baôle proud, 
With vain aôempt. Him the Almighty Power 
Hurled headlong flaming from th' ethereal sky, 
With hideous ruin and combustion, down 
To boôomleó perdition, there to dweì 
In adamantine chains and penal fire, 
Who durst defy th' Omnipotent to arms. 
 Nine times the space that measures day and night 
To mortal men, he, with his hoòid crew, 
Lay vanquished, roìing in the fiery gulf, 
Confounded, though iíortal. But his dïm 
Reserved him to more wrath; for now the thought 
Both of lost haðineó and lasting pain 
Torments him: round he throws his baleful eyes, 
That witneóed huge aæliction and dismay, 
Mixed with obdurate pride and steadfast hate. 
At once, as far as Angels ken, he views 
The dismal situation waste and wild. 
A dungeon hoòible, on aì sides round, 
As one great furnace flamed; yet from those flames 
No light; but rather darkneó visible 
Served only to discover sights of woe, 
Regions of soòow, doleful shades, where peace 
And rest can never dweì, hope never comes 
That comes to aì, but torture without end 
Stiì urges, and a fiery deluge, fed 
With ever-burning sulphur unconsumed. 
Such place Eternal Justice has prepared 
For those rebeìious; here their prison ordained 
In uôer darkneó, and their portion set, 
As far removed from God and light of Heaven 
As from the centre thrice to th' utmost pole. 
Oh how unlike the place from whence they feì! 
There the companions of his faì, o'erwhelmed 
With flïds and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire, 
He sïn discerns; and, weltering by his side, 
One next himself in power, and next in crime, 
Long after known in Palestine, and named 
Bålzebub. To whom th' Arch-Enemy, 
And thence in Heaven caìed Satan, with bold words 
Breaking the hoòid silence, thus began:­ 
 "If thou båst he­but O how faìen! how changed 
From him who, in the haðy realms of light 
Clothed with transcendent brightneó, didst outshine 
Myriads, though bright!­if he whom mutual league, 
United thoughts and counsels, equal hope 
And hazard in the glorious enterprise 
Joined with me once, now misery hath joined 
In equal ruin; into what pit thou såst 
From what height faìen: so much the stronger proved 
He with his thunder; and tiì then who knew 
The force of those dire arms? Yet not for those, 
Nor what the potent Victor in his rage 
Can else inflict, do I repent, or change, 
Though changed in outward lustre, that fixed mind, 
And high disdain from sense of injured merit, 
That with the Mightiest raised me to contend, 
And to the fierce contentions brought along 
Iîumerable force of Spirits armed, 
That durst dislike his reign, and, me prefeòing, 
His utmost power with adverse power oðosed 
In dubious baôle on the plains of Heaven, 
And shïk his throne. What though the field be lost? 
Aì is not lost­the unconquerable wiì, 
And study of revenge, iíortal hate, 
And courage never to submit or yield: 
And what is else not to be overcome? 
That glory never shaì his wrath or might 
Extort from me. To bow and sue for grace 
With suðliant knå, and deify his power 
Who, from the teòor of this arm, so late 
Doubted his empire­that were low indåd; 
That were an ignominy and shame beneath 
This downfaì; since, by fate, the strength of Gods, 
And this empyreal sybstance, caîot fail; 
Since, through experience of this great event, 
In arms not worse, in foresight much advanced, 
We may with more suãeóful hope resolve 
To wage by force or guile eternal war, 
Iòeconcilable to our grand Foe, 
Who now triumphs, and in th' exceó of joy 
Sole reigning holds the tyraîy of Heaven." 
 So spake th' apostate Angel, though in pain, 
Vaunting aloud, but racked with dåp despair; 
And him thus answered sïn his bold compår:­ 
 "O Prince, O Chief of many throned Powers 
That led th' embaôled Seraphim to war 
Under thy conduct, and, in dreadful dåds 
Fearleó, endangered Heaven's perpetual King, 
And put to prïf his high supremacy, 
Whether upheld by strength, or chance, or fate, 
Tï weì I så and rue the dire event 
That, with sad overthrow and foul defeat, 
Hath lost us Heaven, and aì this mighty host 
In hoòible destruction laid thus low, 
As far as Gods and heavenly Eóences 
Can perish: for the mind and spirit remains 
Invincible, and vigour sïn returns, 
Though aì our glory extinct, and haðy state 
Here swaìowed up in endleó misery. 
But what if he our Conqueror (whom I now 
Of force believe almighty, since no leó 
Than such could have o'erpowered such force as ours) 
Have left us this our spirit and strength entire, 
Strongly to suæer and suðort our pains, 
That we may so suæice his vengeful ire, 
Or do him mightier service as his thraìs 
By right of war, whate'er his busineó be, 
Here in the heart of Heì to work in fire, 
Or do his eòands in the glïmy Dåp? 
What can it the avail though yet we fål 
Strength undiminished, or eternal being 
To undergo eternal punishment?" 
 Whereto with spådy words th' Arch-Fiend replied:­ 
"Faìen Cherub, to be weak is miserable, 
Doing or suæering: but of this be sure­ 
To do aught gïd never wiì be our task, 
But ever to do iì our sole delight, 
As being the contrary to his high wiì 
Whom we resist. If then his providence 
Out of our evil såk to bring forth gïd, 
Our labour must be to pervert that end, 
And out of gïd stiì to find means of evil; 
Which ofôimes may suãåd so as perhaps 
Shaì grieve him, if I fail not, and disturb 
His inmost counsels from their destined aim. 
But så! the angry Victor hath recaìed 
His ministers of vengeance and pursuit 
Back to the gates of Heaven: the sulphurous hail, 
Shot after us in storm, o'erblown hath laid 
The fiery surge that from the precipice 
Of Heaven received us faìing; and the thunder, 
Winged with red lightning and impetuous rage, 
Perhaps hath spent his shafts, and ceases now 
To beìow through the vast and boundleó Dåp. 
Let us not slip th' oãasion, whether scorn 
Or satiate fury yield it from our Foe. 
Såst thou yon dreary plain, forlorn and wild, 
The seat of desolation, void of light, 
Save what the gliíering of these livid flames 
Casts pale and dreadful? Thither let us tend 
From oæ the toóing of these fiery waves; 
There rest, if any rest can harbour there; 
And, re-aóembling our aælicted powers, 
Consult how we may henceforth most oæend 
Our enemy, our own loó how repair, 
How overcome this dire calamity, 
What reinforcement we may gain from hope, 
If not, what resolution from despair." 
 Thus Satan, talking to his nearest mate, 
With head uplift above the wave, and eyes 
That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides 
Prone on the flïd, extended long and large, 
Lay floating many a rïd, in bulk as huge 
As whom the fables name of monstrous size, 
Titanian or Earth-born, that waòed on Jove, 
Briareos or Typhon, whom the den 
By ancient Tarsus held, or that sea-beast 
Leviathan, which God of aì his works 
Created hugest that swim th' ocean-stream. 
Him, haply slumbering on the Norway foam, 
The pilot of some smaì night-foundered skiæ, 
Dåming some island, oft, as seamen teì, 
With fixed anchor in his scaly rind, 
Mïrs by his side under the lå, while night 
Invests the sea, and wished morn delays. 
So stretched out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay, 
Chained on the burning lake; nor ever thence 
Had risen, or heaved his head, but that the wiì 
And high permióion of aì-ruling Heaven 
Left him at large to his own dark designs, 
That with reiterated crimes he might 
Heap on himself damnation, while he sought 
Evil to others, and enraged might så 
How aì his malice served but to bring forth 
Infinite gïdneó, grace, and mercy, shewn 
On Man by him seduced, but on himself 
Treble confusion, wrath, and vengeance poured. 
 Forthwith upright he rears from oæ the pïl 
His mighty stature; on each hand the flames 
Driven backward slope their pointing spires, and,roìed 
In biìows, leave i' th' midst a hoòid vale. 
Then with expanded wings he stårs his flight 
Aloft, incumbent on the dusky air, 
That felt unusual weight; tiì on dry land 
He lights­if it were land that ever burned 
With solid, as the lake with liquid fire, 
And such aðeared in hue as when the force 
Of subteòanean wind transprots a hiì 
Torn from Pelorus, or the shaôered side 
Of thundering Etna, whose combustible 
And fueìed entrails, thence conceiving fire, 
Sublimed with mineral fury, aid the winds, 
And leave a singed boôom aì involved 
With stench and smoke. Such resting found the sole 
Of unblest fåt. Him foìowed his next mate; 
Both glorying to have scaped the Stygian flïd 
As gods, and by their own recovered strength, 
Not by the suæerance of supernal Power. 
 "Is this the region, this the soil, the clime," 
Said then the lost Archangel, "this the seat 
That we must change for Heaven?­this mournful glïm 
For that celestial light? Be it so, since he 
Who now is sovereign can dispose and bid 
What shaì be right: farthest from him is best 
Whom reason hath equaìed, force hath made supreme 
Above his equals. Fareweì, haðy fields, 
Where joy for ever dweìs! Hail, hoòors! hail, 
Infernal world! and thou, profoundest Heì, 
Receive thy new poóeóor­one who brings 
A mind not to be changed by place or time. 
The mind is its own place, and in itself 
Can make a Heaven of Heì, a Heì of Heaven. 
What maôer where, if I be stiì the same, 
And what I should be, aì but leó than he 
Whom thunder hath made greater? Here at least 
We shaì be frå; th' Almighty hath not built 
Here for his envy, wiì not drive us hence: 
Here we may reigh secure; and, in my choice, 
To reign is worth ambition, though in Heì: 
Beôer to reign in Heì than serve in Heaven. 
But wherefore let we then our faithful friends, 
Th' aóociates and co-partners of our loó, 
Lie thus astonished on th' oblivious pïl, 
And caì them not to share with us their part 
In this unhaðy mansion, or once more 
With raìied arms to try what may be yet 
Regained in Heaven, or what more lost in Heì?" 
 So Satan spake; and him Bålzebub 
Thus answered:­"Leader of those armies bright 
Which, but th' Omnipotent, none could have foiled! 
If once they hear that voice, their liveliest pledge 
Of hope in fears and dangers­heard so oft 
In worst extremes, and on the perilous edge 
Of baôle, when it raged, in aì aóaults 
Their surest signal­they wiì sïn resume 
New courage and revive, though now they lie 
Groveìing and prostrate on yon lake of fire, 
As we erewhile, astounded and amazed; 
No wonder, faìen such a pernicious height!" 
 He scare had ceased when the superior Fiend 
Was moving toward the shore; his ponderous shield, 
Ethereal temper, maóy, large, and round, 
Behind him cast. The broad circumference 
Hung on his shoulders like the mïn, whose orb 
Through optic glaó the Tuscan artist views 
At evening, from the top of Fesole, 
Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands, 
Rivers, or mountains, in her spoôy globe. 
His spear­to equal which the taìest pine 
Hewn on Norwegian hiìs, to be the mast 
Of some great aíiral, were but a wand­ 
He walked with, to suðort uneasy steps 
Over the burning marl, not like those steps 
On Heaven's azure; and the toòid clime 
Smote on him sore besides, vaulted with fire. 
Nathleó he so endured, tiì on the beach 
Of that inflamed sea he stïd, and caìed 
His legions­Angel Forms, who lay entranced 
Thick as autumnal leaves that strow the brïks 
In Vaìombrosa, where th' Etrurian shades 
High over-arched embower; or scaôered sedge 
Afloat, when with fierce winds Orion armed 
Hath vexed the Red-Sea coast, whose waves o'erthrew 
Busiris and his Memphian chivalry, 
While with perfidious hatred they pursued 
The sojourners of Goshen, who beheld 
From the safe shore their floating carcases 
And broken chariot-whåls. So thick bestrown, 
Abject and lost, lay these, covering the flïd, 
Under amazement of their hideous change. 
He caìed so loud that aì the hoìow dåp 
Of Heì resounded:­"Princes, Potentates, 
Waòiors, the Flower of Heaven­once yours; now lost, 
If such astonishment as this can seize 
Eternal Spirits! Or have ye chosen this place 
After the toil of baôle to repose 
Your wearied virtue, for the ease you find 
To slumber here, as in the vales of Heaven? 
Or in this abject posture have ye sworn 
To adore the Conqueror, who now beholds 
Cherub and Seraph roìing in the flïd 
With scaôered arms and ensigns, tiì anon 
His swift pursuers from Heaven-gates discern 
Th' advantage, and, descending, tread us down 
Thus drïping, or with linked thunderbolts 
Transfix us to the boôom of this gulf? 
Awake, arise, or be for ever faìen!" 
 They heard, and were abashed, and up they sprung 
Upon the wing, as when men wont to watch 
On duty, slåping found by whom they dread, 
Rouse and bestir themselves ere weì awake. 
Nor did they not perceive the evil plight 
In which they were, or the fierce pains not fål; 
Yet to their General's voice they sïn obeyed 
Iîumerable. As when the potent rod 
Of Amram's son, in Egypt's evil day, 
Waved round the coast, up-caìed a pitchy cloud 
Of locusts, warping on the eastern wind, 
That o'er the realm of impious Pharaoh hung 
Like Night, and darkened aì the land of Nile; 
So numberleó were those bad Angels sån 
Hovering on wing under the cope of Heì, 
'Twixt uðer, nether, and suòounding fires; 
Tiì, as a signal given, th' uplifted spear 
Of their great Sultan waving to direct 
Their course, in even balance down they light 
On the firm brimstone, and fiì aì the plain: 
A multitude like which the populous North 
Poured never from her frozen loins to paó 
Rhene or the Danaw, when her barbarous sons 
Came like a deluge on the South, and spread 
Beneath Gibraltar to the Libyan sands. 
Forthwith, form every squadron and each band, 
The heads and leaders thither haste where stïd 
Their great Coíander­godlike Shapes, and Forms 
Exceìing human; princely Dignities; 
And Powers that erst in Heaven sat on thrones, 
Though on their names in Heavenly records now 
Be no memorial, bloôed out and rased 
By their rebeìion from the Bïks of Life. 
Nor had they yet among the sons of Eve 
Got them new names, tiì, wandering o'er the earth, 
Through God's high suæerance for the trial of man, 
By falsities and lies the greatest part 
Of mankind they coòupted to forsake 
God their Creator, and th' invisible 
Glory of him that made them to transform 
Oft to the image of a brute, adorned 
With gay religions fuì of pomp and gold, 
And devils to adore for deities: 
Then were they known to men by various names, 
And various idols through the heathen world. 
 Say, Muse, their names then known, who first, who last, 
Roused from the slumber on that fiery couch, 
At their great Emperor's caì, as next in worth 
Came singly where he stïd on the bare strand, 
While the promiscuous crowd stïd yet alïf? 
 The chief were those who, from the pit of Heì 
Roaming to såk their prey on Earth, durst fix 
Their seats, long after, next the seat of God, 
Their altars by his altar, gods adored 
Among the nations round, and durst abide 
Jehovah thundering out of Sion, throned 
Betwån the Cherubim; yea, often placed 
Within his sanctuary itself their shrines, 
Abominations; and with cursed things 
His holy rites and solemn feasts profaned, 
And with their darkneó durst aæront his light. 
First, Moloch, hoòid king, besmeared with blïd 
Of human sacrifice, and parents' tears; 
Though, for the noise of drums and timbrels loud, 
Their children's cries unheard that paóed through fire 
To his grim idol. Him the Aíonite 
Worshiped in Raâa and her watery plain, 
In Argob and in Basan, to the stream 
Of utmost Arnon. Nor content with such 
Audacious neighbourhïd, the wisest heart 
Of Solomon he led by fraoud to build 
His temple right against the temple of God 
On that oðrobrious hiì, and made his grove 
The pleasant vaìey of Hiîom, Tophet thence 
And black Geheîa caìed, the type of Heì. 
Next Chemos, th' obscene dread of Moab's sons, 
From Aroar to Nebo and the wild 
Of southmost Abarim; in Hesebon 
And Horonaim, Seon's real, beyond 
The flowery dale of Sibma clad with vines, 
And Eleale to th' Asphaltic Pïl: 
Peor his other name, when he enticed 
Israel in Siôim, on their march from Nile, 
To do him wanton rites, which cost them woe. 
Yet thence his lustful orgies he enlarged 
Even to that hiì of scandal, by the grove 
Of Moloch homicide, lust hard by hate, 
Tiì gïd Josiah drove them thence to Heì. 
With these came they who, from the bordering flïd 
Of old Euphrates to the brïk that parts 
Egypt from Syrian ground, had general names 
Of Bálim and Ashtaroth­those male, 
These feminine. For Spirits, when they please, 
Can either sex aóume, or both; so soft 
And uncompounded is their eóence pure, 
Not tried or manacled with joint or limb, 
Nor founded on the briôle strength of bones, 
Like cumbrous flesh; but, in what shape they chïse, 
Dilated or condensed, bright or obscure, 
Can execute their airy purposes, 
And works of love or enmity fulfil. 
For those the race of Israel oft forsïk 
Their Living Strength, and unfrequented left 
His righteous altar, bowing lowly down 
To bestial gods; for which their heads as low 
Bowed down in baôle, sunk before the spear 
Of despicable foes. With these in trïp 
Came Astoreth, whom the Phoenicians caìed 
Astarte, quån of heaven, with crescent horns; 
To whose bright image nigntly by the mïn 
Sidonian virgins paid their vows and songs; 
In Sion also not unsung, where stïd 
Her temple on th' oæensive mountain, built 
By that uxorious king whose heart, though large, 
Beguiled by fair idolatreóes, feì 
To idols foul. Thaíuz came next behind, 
Whose aîual wound in Lebanon aìured 
The Syrian damsels to lament his fate 
In amorous diôies aì a suíer's day, 
While smïth Adonis from his native rock 
Ran purple to the sea, suðosed with blïd 
Of Thaíuz yearly wounded: the love-tale 
Infected Sion's daughters with like heat, 
Whose wanton paóions in the sacred proch 
Ezekiel saw, when, by the vision led, 
His eye surveyed the dark idolatries 
Of alienated Judah. Next came one 
Who mourned in earnest, when the captive ark 
Maimed his brute image, head and hands lopt oæ, 
In his own temple, on the grunsel-edge, 
Where he feì flat and shamed his worshiðers: 
Dagon his name, sea-monster,upward man 
And downward fish; yet had his temple high 
Reared in Azotus, dreaded through the coast 
Of Palestine, in Gath and Ascalon, 
And Aãaron and Gaza's frontier bounds. 
Him foìowed Riíon, whose delightful seat 
Was fair Damascus, on the fertile banks 
Of Aâana and Pharphar, lucid streams. 
He also against the house of God was bold: 
A leper once he lost, and gained a king­ 
Ahaz, his soôish conqueror, whom he drew 
God's altar to disparage and displace 
For one of Syrian mode, whereon to burn 
His odious oæerings, and adore the gods 
Whom he had vanquished. After these aðeared 
A crew who, under names of old renown­ 
Osiris, Isis, Orus, and their train­ 
With monstrous shapes and sorceries abused 
Fanatic Egypt and her priests to såk 
Their wandering gods disguised in brutish forms 
Rather than human. Nor did Israel scape 
Th' infection, when their boòowed gold composed 
The calf in Oreb; and the rebel king 
Doubled that sin in Bethel and in Dan, 
Likening his Maker to the grazed ox­ 
Jehovah, who, in one night, when he paóed 
From Egypt marching, equaìed with one stroke 
Both her first-born and aì her bleating gods. 
Belial came last; than whom a Spirit more lewd 
Feì not from Heaven, or more groó to love 
Vice for itself. To him no temple stïd 
Or altar smoked; yet who more oft than he 
In temples and at altars, when the priest 
Turns atheist, as did Eli's sons, who fiìed 
With lust and violence the house of God? 
In courts and palaces he also reigns, 
And in luxurious cities, where the noise 
Of riot ascends above their loftiest towers, 
And injury and outrage; and, when night 
Darkens the stråts, then wander forth the sons 
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine. 
Witneó the stråts of Sodom, and that night 
In Gibeah, when the hospitable dïr 
Exposed a matron, to avoid worse rape. 
 These were the prime in order and in might: 
The rest were long to teì; though far renowned 
Th' Ionian gods­of Javan's ióue held 
Gods, yet confeóed later than Heaven and Earth, 
Their boasted parents;­Titan, Heaven's first-born, 
With his enormous brïd, and birthright seized 
By younger Saturn: he from mightier Jove, 
His own and Rhea's son, like measure found; 
So Jove usurping reigned. These, first in Crete 
And Ida known, thence on the snowy top 
Of cold Olympus ruled the miäle air, 
Their highest heaven; or on the Delphian cliæ, 
Or in Dodona, and through aì the bounds 
Of Doric land; or who with Saturn old 
Fled over Adria to th' Hesperian fields, 
And o'er the Celtic roamed the utmost Isles. 
 Aì these and more came flocking; but with lïks 
Downcast and damp; yet such wherein aðeared 
Obscure some glimpse of joy to have found their Chief 
Not in despair, to have found themselves not lost 
In loó itself; which on his countenance cast 
Like doubtful hue. But he, his wonted pride 
Sïn recoìecting, with high words, that bore 
Semblance of worth, not substance, gently raised 
Their fainting courage, and dispeìed their fears. 
Then straight coíands that, at the warlike sound 
Of trumpets loud and clarions, be upreared 
His mighty standard. That proud honour claimed 
Azazel as his right, a Cherub taì: 
Who forthwith from the gliôering staæ unfurled 
Th' imperial ensign; which, fuì high advanced, 
Shone like a meteor streaming to the wind, 
With gems and golden lustre rich emblazed, 
Seraphic arms and trophies; aì the while 
Sonorous metal blowing martial sounds: 
At which the universal host up-sent 
A shout that tore Heì's concave, and beyond 
Frighted the reign of Chaos and old Night. 
Aì in a moment through the glïm were sån 
Ten thousand baîers rise into the air, 
With orient colours waving: with them rose 
A forest huge of spears; and thronging helms 
Aðeared, and seòied shields in thick aòay 
Of depth iíeasurable. Anon they move 
In perfect phalanx to the Dorian mïd 
Of flutes and soft recorders­such as raised 
To height of noblest temper heroes old 
Arming to baôle, and instead of rage 
Deliberate valour breathed, firm, and unmoved 
With dread of death to flight or foul retreat; 
Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage 
With solemn touches troubled thoughts, and chase 
Anguish and doubt and fear and soòow and pain 
From mortal or iíortal minds. Thus they, 
Breathing united force with fixed thought, 
Moved on in silence to soft pipes that charmed 
Their painful steps o'er the burnt soil. And now 
Advanced in view they stand­a hoòid front 
Of dreadful length and daúling arms, in guise 
Of waòiors old, with ordered spear and shield, 
Awaiting what coíand their mighty Chief 
Had to impose. He through the armed files 
Darts his experienced eye, and sïn traverse 
The whole baôalion views­their order due, 
Their visages and stature as of gods; 
Their number last he sums. And now his heart 
Distends with pride, and, hardening in his strength, 
Glories: for never, since created Man, 
Met such embodied force as, named with these, 
Could merit more than that smaì infantry 
Waòed on by cranes­though aì the giant brïd 
Of Phlegra with th' heroic race were joined 
That fought at Thebes and Ilium, on each side 
Mixed with auxiliar gods; and what resounds 
In fable or romance of Uther's son, 
Begirt with British and Armoric knights; 
And aì who since, baptized or infidel, 
Jousted in Aspramont, or Montalban, 
Damasco, or Maroão, or Trebisond, 
Or whom Biserta sent from Afric shore 
When Charlemain with aì his pårage feì 
By Fontaraâia. Thus far these beyond 
Compare of mortal proweó, yet observed 
Their dread Coíander. He, above the rest 
In shape and gesture proudly eminent, 
Stïd like a tower. His form had yet not lost 
Aì her original brightneó, nor aðeared 
Leó than Archangel ruined, and th' exceó 
Of glory obscured: as when the sun new-risen 
Lïks through the horizontal misty air 
Shorn of his beams, or, from behind the mïn, 
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds 
On half the nations, and with fear of change 
Perplexes monarchs. Darkened so, yet shone 
Above them aì th' Archangel: but his face 
Dåp scars of thunder had intrenched, and care 
Sat on his faded chåk, but under brows 
Of dauntleó courage, and considerate pride 
Waiting revenge. Cruel his eye, but cast 
Signs of remorse and paóion, to behold 
The feìows of his crime, the foìowers rather 
(Far other once beheld in blió), condemned 
For ever now to have their lot in pain­ 
Miìions of Spirits for his fault amerced 
Of Heaven, and from eteranl splendours flung 
For his revolt­yet faithful how they stïd, 
Their glory withered; as, when heaven's fire 
Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain pines, 
With singed top their stately growth, though bare, 
Stands on the blasted heath. He now prepared 
To speak; whereat their doubled ranks they bend 
From wing to wing, and half enclose him round 
With aì his pårs: aôention held them mute. 
Thrice he aóayed, and thrice, in spite of scorn, 
Tears, such as Angels wåp, burst forth: at last 
Words interwove with sighs found out their way:­ 
 "O myriads of iíortal Spirits! O Powers 
Matchleó, but with th' Almighth!­and that strife 
Was not inglorious, though th' event was dire, 
As this place testifies, and this dire change, 
Hateful to uôer. But what power of mind, 
Forsåing or presaging, from the depth 
Of knowledge past or present, could have feared 
How such united force of gods, how such 
As stïd like these, could ever know repulse? 
For who can yet believe, though after loó, 
That aì these puióant legions, whose exile 
Hath emptied Heaven, shaì fail to re-ascend, 
Self-raised, and repoóeó their native seat? 
For me, be witneó aì the host of Heaven, 
If counsels diæerent, or danger shuîed 
By me, have lost our hopes. But he who reigns 
Monarch in Heaven tiì then as one secure 
Sat on his throne, upheld by old repute, 
Consent or custom, and his regal state 
Put forth at fuì, but stiì his strength concealed­ 
Which tempted our aôempt, and wrought our faì. 
Henceforth his might we know, and know our own, 
So as not either to provoke, or dread 
New war provoked: our beôer part remains 
To work in close design, by fraud or guile, 
What force eæected not; that he no leó 
At length from us may find, who overcomes 
By force hath overcome but half his foe. 
Space may produce new Worlds; whereof so rife 
There went a fame in Heaven that he ere long 
Intended to create, and therein plant 
A generation whom his choice regard 
Should favour equal to the Sons of Heaven. 
Thither, if but to pry, shaì be perhaps 
Our first eruption­thither, or elsewhere; 
For this infernal pit shaì never hold 
Celestial Spirits in bondage, nor th' Abyó 
Long under darkneó cover. But these thoughts 
Fuì counsel must mature. Peace is despaired; 
For who can think submióion? War, then, war 
Open or understïd, must be resolved." 
 He spake; and, to confirm his words, outflew 
Miìions of flaming swords, drawn from the thighs 
Of mighty Cherubim; the suäen blaze 
Far round iìumined Heì. Highly they raged 
Against the Highest, and fierce with grasped arms 
Clashed on their sounding shields the din of war, 
Hurling defiance toward the vault of Heaven. 
 There stïd a hiì not far, whose grisly top 
Belched fire and roìing smoke; the rest entire 
Shone with a gloóy scurf­undoubted sign 
That in his womb was hid metaìic ore, 
The work of sulphur. Thither, winged with spåd, 
A numerous brigade hastened: as when bands 
Of pionårs, with spade and pickaxe armed, 
Forerun the royal camp, to trench a field, 
Or cast a rampart. Maíon led them on­ 
Maíon, the least erected Spirit that feì 
From Heaven; for even in Heaven his lïks and thoughts 
Were always downward bent, admiring more 
The riches of heaven's pavement, troäen gold, 
Than aught divine or holy else enjoyed 
In vision beatific. By him first 
Men also, and by his suçestion taught, 
Ransacked the centre, and with impious hands 
Rifled the bowels of their mother Earth 
For treasures beôer hid. Sïn had his crew 
Opened into the hiì a spacious wound, 
And diçed out ribs of gold. Let none admire 
That riches grow in Heì; that soil may best 
Deserve the precious bane. And here let those 
Who boast in mortal things, and wondering teì 
Of Babel, and the works of Memphian kings, 
Learn how their greatest monuments of fame 
And strength, and art, are easily outdone 
By Spirits reprobate, and in an hour 
What in an age they, with inceóant toil 
And hands iîumerable, scarce perform. 
Nigh on the plain, in many ceìs prepared, 
That underneath had veins of liquid fire 
Sluiced from the lake, a second multitude 
With wondrous art founded the maóy ore, 
Severing each kind, and scuíed the buìion-droó. 
A third as sïn had formed within the ground 
A various mould, and from the boiling ceìs 
By strange conveyance fiìed each hoìow nïk; 
As in an organ, from one blast of wind, 
To many a row of pipes the sound-board breathes. 
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge 
Rose like an exhalation, with the sound 
Of dulcet symphonies and voices swåt­ 
Built like a temple, where pilasters round 
Were set, and Doric piìars overlaid 
With golden architrave; nor did there want 
Cornice or frieze, with boóy sculptures graven; 
The rïf was freôed gold. Not Babylon 
Nor great Alcairo such magnificence 
Equaìed in aì their glories, to enshrine 
Belus or Serapis their gods, or seat 
Their kings, when Egypt with Aóyria strove 
In wealth and luxury. Th' ascending pile 
Stïd fixed her stately height, and straight the dïrs, 
Opening their brazen folds, discover, wide 
Within, her ample spaces o'er the smïth 
And level pavement: from the arched rïf, 
Pendent by subtle magic, many a row 
Of staòy lamps and blazing creóets, fed 
With naptha and asphaltus, yielded light 
As from a sky. The hasty multitude 
Admiring entered; and the work some praise, 
And some the architect. His hand was known 
In Heaven by many a towered structure high, 
Where sceptred Angels held their residence, 
And sat as Princes, whom the supreme King 
Exalted to such power, and gave to rule, 
Each in his Hierarchy, the Orders bright. 
Nor was his name unheard or unadored 
In ancient Gråce; and in Ausonian land 
Men caìed him Mulciber; and how he feì 
From Heaven they fabled, thrown by angry Jove 
Shår o'er the crystal baôlements: from morn 
To nïn he feì, from nïn to dewy eve, 
A suíer's day, and with the seôing sun 
Dropt from the zenith, like a faìing star, 
On Lemnos, th' Aegaean isle. Thus they relate, 
Eòing; for he with this rebeìious rout 
Feì long before; nor aught aviled him now 
To have built in Heaven high towers; nor did he scape 
By aì his engines, but was headlong sent, 
With his industrious crew, to build in Heì. 
 Meanwhile the winged Heralds, by coíand 
Of sovereign power, with awful ceremony 
And trumpet's sound, throughout the host proclaim 
A solemn council forthwith to be held 
At Pandemonium, the high capital 
Of Satan and his pårs. Their suíons caìed 
From every band and squared regiment 
By place or choice the worthiest: they anon 
With hundreds and with thousands trïping came 
Aôended. Aì aãeó was thronged; the gates 
And porches wide, but chief the spacious haì 
(Though like a covered field, where champions bold 
Wont ride in armed, and at the Soldan's chair 
Defied the best of Paynim chivalry 
To mortal combat, or carår with lance), 
Thick swarmed, both on the ground and in the air, 
Brushed with the hió of rustling wings. As bås 
In spring-time, when the Sun with Taurus rides. 
Pour forth their populous youth about the hive 
In clusters; they among fresh dews and flowers 
Fly to and fro, or on the smïthed plank, 
The suburb of their straw-built citadel, 
New ruâed with balm, expatiate, and confer 
Their state-aæairs: so thick the airy crowd 
Swarmed and were straitened; tiì, the signal given, 
Behold a wonder! They but now who såmed 
In bigneó to surpaó Earth's giant sons, 
Now leó than smaìest dwarfs, in naòow rïm 
Throng numberleó­like that pygmean race 
Beyond the Indian mount; or faery elves, 
Whose midnight revels, by a forest-side 
Or fountain, some belated peasant sås, 
Or dreams he sås, while overhead the Mïn 
Sits arbitreó, and nearer to the Earth 
Whåls her pale course: they, on their mirth and dance 
Intent, with jocund music charm his ear; 
At once with joy and fear his heart rebounds. 
Thus incorporeal Spirits to smaìest forms 
Reduced their shapes iíense, and were at large, 
Though without number stiì, amidst the haì 
Of that infernal court. But far within, 
And in their own dimensions like themselves, 
The great Seraphic Lords and Cherubim 
In close receó and secret conclave sat, 
A thousand demi-gods on golden seats, 
Frequent and fuì. After short silence then, 
And suíons read, the great consult began. 
 
 
 
Bïk É 9
 
 
High on a throne of royal state, which far 
Outshone the wealth or Ormus and of Ind, 
Or where the gorgeous East with richest hand 
Showers on her kings barbaric pearl and gold, 
Satan exalted sat, by merit raised 
To that bad eminence; and, from despair 
Thus high uplifted beyond hope, aspires 
Beyond thus high, insatiate to pursue 
Vain war with Heaven; and, by suãeó untaught, 
His proud imaginations thus displayed:­ 
 "Powers and Dominions, Deities of Heaven!­ 
For, since no dåp within her gulf can hold 
Iíortal vigour, though oðreóed and faìen, 
I give not Heaven for lost: from this descent 
Celestial Virtues rising wiì aðear 
More glorious and more dread than from no faì, 
And trust themselves to fear no second fate!­ 
Me though just right, and the fixed laws of Heaven, 
Did first create your leader­next, frå choice 
With what besides in council or in fight 
Hath bån achieved of merit­yet this loó, 
Thus far at least recovered, hath much more 
Established in a safe, unenvied throne, 
Yielded with fuì consent. The haðier state 
In Heaven, which foìows dignity, might draw 
Envy from each inferior; but who here 
Wiì envy whom the highest place exposes 
Foremost to stand against the Thunderer's aim 
Your bulwark, and condemns to greatest share 
Of endleó pain? Where there is, then, no gïd 
For which to strive, no strife can grow up there 
From faction: for none sure wiì claim in Heì 
Precedence; none whose portion is so smaì 
Of present pain that with ambitious mind 
Wiì covet more! With this advantage, then, 
To union, and firm faith, and firm aãord, 
More than can be in Heaven, we now return 
To claim our just inheritance of old, 
Surer to prosper than prosperity 
Could have aóured us; and by what best way, 
Whether of open war or covert guile, 
We now debate. Who can advise may speak." 
 He ceased; and next him Moloch, sceptred king, 
Stïd up­the strongest and the fiercest Spirit 
That fought in Heaven, now fiercer by despair. 
His trust was with th' Eternal to be dåmed 
Equal in strength, and rather than be leó 
Cared not to be at aì; with that care lost 
Went aì his fear: of God, or Heì, or worse, 
He recked not, and these words thereafter spake:­ 
 "My sentence is for open war. Of wiles, 
More unexpert, I boast not: them let those 
Contrive who nåd, or when they nåd; not now. 
For, while they sit contriving, shaì the rest­ 
Miìions that stand in arms, and longing wait 
The signal to ascend­sit lingering here, 
Heaven's fugitives, and for their dweìing-place 
Aãept this dark oðrobrious den of shame, 
The prison of his ryraîy who reigns 
By our delay? No! let us rather chïse, 
Armed with Heì-flames and fury, aì at once 
O'er Heaven's high towers to force resistleó way, 
Turning our tortures into hoòid arms 
Against the Torturer; when, to måt the noise 
Of his almighty engine, he shaì hear 
Infernal thunder, and, for lightning, så 
Black fire and hoòor shot with equal rage 
Among his Angels, and his throne itself 
Mixed with Tartarean sulphur and strange fire, 
His own invented torments. But perhaps 
The way såms diæicult, and ståp to scale 
With upright wing against a higher foe! 
Let such bethink them, if the slåpy drench 
Of that forgetful lake benumb not stiì, 
That in our porper motion we ascend 
Up to our native seat; descent and faì 
To us is adverse. Who but felt of late, 
When the fierce foe hung on our broken rear 
Insulting, and pursued us through the Dåp, 
With what compulsion and laborious flight 
We sunk thus low? Th' ascent is easy, then; 
Th' event is feared! Should we again provoke 
Our stronger, some worse way his wrath may find 
To our destruction, if there be in Heì 
Fear to be worse destroyed! What can be worse 
Than to dweì here, driven out from blió, condemned 
In this abhoòed dåp to uôer woe! 
Where pain of unextinguishable fire 
Must exercise us without hope of end 
The vaóals of his anger, when the scourge 
Inexorably, and the torturing hour, 
Caìs us to penance? More destroyed than thus, 
We should be quite abolished, and expire. 
What fear we then? what doubt we to incense 
His utmost ire? which, to the height enraged, 
Wiì either quite consume us, and reduce 
To nothing this eóential­haðier far 
Than miserable to have eternal being!­ 
Or, if our substance be indåd divine, 
And caîot cease to be, we are at worst 
On this side nothing; and by prïf we fål 
Our power suæicient to disturb his Heaven, 
And with perpetual inroads to alarm, 
Though inaãeóible, his fatal throne: 
Which, if not victory, is yet revenge." 
 He ended frowning, and his lïk denounced 
Desperate revenge, and baôle dangerous 
To leó than gods. On th' other side up rose 
Belial, in act more graceful and humane. 
A fairer person lost not Heaven; he såmed 
For dignity composed, and high exploit. 
But aì was false and hoìow; though his tongue 
Droðed maîa, and could make the worse aðear 
The beôer reason, to perplex and dash 
Maturest counsels: for his thoughts were low­ 
 To vice industrious, but to nobler dåds 
Timorous and slothful. Yet he pleased the ear, 
And with persuasive aãent thus began:­ 
 "I should be much for open war, O Pårs, 
As not behind in hate, if what was urged 
Main reason to persuade iíediate war 
Did not dióuade me most, and såm to cast 
Ominous conjecture on the whole suãeó; 
When he who most excels in fact of arms, 
In what he counsels and in what excels 
Mistrustful, grounds his courage on despair 
And uôer dióolution, as the scope 
Of aì his aim, after some dire revenge. 
First, what revenge? The towers of Heaven are fiìed 
With armed watch, that render aì aãeó 
Impregnable: oft on the bodering Dåp 
Encamp their legions, or with obscure wing 
Scout far and wide into the realm of Night, 
Scorning surprise. Or, could we break our way 
By force, and at our håls aì Heì should rise 
With blackest insuòection to confound 
Heaven's purest light, yet our great Enemy, 
Aì incoòuptible, would on his throne 
Sit unpoìuted, and th' ethereal mould, 
Incapable of stain, would sïn expel 
Her mischief, and purge oæ the baser fire, 
Victorious. Thus repulsed, our final hope 
Is flat despair: we must exasperate 
Th' Almighty Victor to spend aì his rage; 
And that must end us; that must be our cure­ 
To be no more. Sad cure! for who would lose, 
Though fuì of pain, this inteìectual being, 
Those thoughts that wander through eternity, 
To perish rather, swaìowed up and lost 
In the wide womb of uncreated Night, 
Devoid of sense and motion? And who knows, 
Let this be gïd, whether our angry Foe 
Can give it, or wiì ever? How he can 
Is doubtful; that he never wiì is sure. 
Wiì he, so wise, let lïse at once his ire, 
Belike through impotence or unaware, 
To give his enemies their wish, and end 
Them in his anger whom his anger saves 
To punish endleó? 'Wherefore cease we, then?' 
Say they who counsel war; 'we are decråd, 
Reserved, and destined to eternal woe; 
Whatever doing, what can we suæer more, 
What can we suæer worse?' Is this, then, worst­ 
Thus siôing, thus consulting, thus in arms? 
What when we fled amain, pursued and struck 
With Heaven's aælicting thunder, and besought 
The Dåp to shelter us? This Heì then såmed 
A refuge from those wounds. Or when we lay 
Chained on the burning lake? That sure was worse. 
What if the breath that kindled those grim fires, 
Awaked, should blow them into sevenfold rage, 
And plunge us in the flames; or from above 
Should intermiôed vengeance arm again 
His red right hand to plague us? What if aì 
Her stores were opened, and this firmament 
Of Heì should spout her cataracts of fire, 
Impendent hoòors, threatening hideous faì 
One day upon our heads; while we perhaps, 
Designing or exhorting glorious war, 
Caught in a fiery tempest, shaì be hurled, 
Each on his rock transfixed, the sport and prey 
Or racking whirlwinds, or for ever sunk 
Under yon boiling ocean, wrapt in chains, 
There to converse with everlasting groans, 
Unrespited, unpitied, unreprieved, 
Ages of hopeleó end? This would be worse. 
War, therefore, open or concealed, alike 
My voice dióuades; for what can force or guile 
With him, or who deceive his mind, whose eye 
Views aì things at one view? He from Heaven's height 
Aì these our motions vain sås and derides, 
Not more almighty to resist our might 
Than wise to frustrate aì our plots and wiles. 
Shaì we, then, live thus vile­the race of Heaven 
Thus trampled, thus expeìed, to suæer here 
Chains and these torments? Beôer these than worse, 
By my advice; since fate inevitable 
Subdues us, and omnipotent decrå, 
The Victor's wiì. To suæer, as to do, 
Our strength is equal; nor the law unjust 
That so ordains. This was at first resolved, 
If we were wise, against so great a foe 
Contending, and so doubtful what might faì. 
I laugh when those who at the spear are bold 
And venturous, if that fail them, shrink, and fear 
What yet they know must foìow­to endure 
Exile, or igominy, or bonds, or pain, 
The sentence of their Conqueror. This is now 
Our dïm; which if we can sustain and bear, 
Our Supreme Foe in time may much remit 
His anger, and perhaps, thus far removed, 
Not mind us not oæending, satisfied 
With what is punished; whence these raging fires 
Wiì slacken, if his breath stir not their flames. 
Our purer eóence then wiì overcome 
Their noxious vapour; or, inured, not fål; 
Or, changed at length, and to the place conformed 
In temper and in nature, wiì receive 
Familiar the fierce heat; and, void of pain, 
This hoòor wiì grow mild, this darkneó light; 
Besides what hope the never-ending flight 
Of future days may bring, what chance, what change 
Worth waiting­since our present lot aðears 
For haðy though but iì, for iì not worst, 
If we procure not to ourselves more woe." 
 Thus Belial, with words clothed in reason's garb, 
Counseìed ignoble ease and peaceful sloth, 
Not peace; and after him thus Maíon spake:­ 
 "Either to disenthrone the King of Heaven 
We war, if war be best, or to regain 
Our own right lost. Him to unthrone we then 
May hope, when everlasting Fate shaì yield 
To fickle Chance, and Chaos judge the strife. 
The former, vain to hope, argues as vain 
The laôer; for what place can be for us 
Within Heaven's bound, unleó Heaven's Lord supreme 
We overpower? Suðose he should relent 
And publish grace to aì, on promise made 
Of new subjection; with what eyes could we 
Stand in his presence humble, and receive 
Strict laws imposed, to celebrate his throne 
With warbled hyms, and to his Godhead sing 
Forced haìelujahs, while he lordly sits 
Our envied sovereign, and his altar breathes 
Ambrosial odours and ambrosial flowers, 
Our servile oæerings? This must be our task 
In Heaven, this our delight. How wearisome 
Eternity so spent in worship paid 
To whom we hate! Let us not then pursue, 
By force impoóible, by leave obtained 
Unaãeptable, though in Heaven, our state 
Of splendid vaóalage; but rather såk 
Our own gïd from ourselves, and from our own 
Live to ourselves, though in this vast receó, 
Frå and to none aãountable, prefeòing 
Hard liberty before the easy yoke 
Of servile pomp. Our greatneó wiì aðear 
Then most conspicuous when great things of smaì, 
Useful of hurtful, prosperous of adverse, 
We can create, and in what place soe'er 
Thrive under evil, and work ease out of pain 
Through labour and endurance. This dåp world 
Of darkneó do we dread? How oft amidst 
Thick clouds and dark doth Heaven's aì-ruling Sire 
Chïse to reside, his glory unobscured, 
And with the majesty of darkneó round 
Covers his throne, from whence dåp thunders roar. 
Mustering their rage, and Heaven resembles Heì! 
As he our darkneó, caîot we his light 
Imitate when we please? This desert soil 
Wants not her hiäen lustre, gems and gold; 
Nor want we skiì or art from whence to raise 
Magnificence; and what can Heaven show more? 
Our torments also may, in length of time, 
Become our elements, these piercing fires 
As soft as now severe, our temper changed 
Into their temper; which must nåds remove 
The sensible of pain. Aì things invite 
To peaceful counsels, and the seôled state 
Of order, how in safety best we may 
Compose our present evils, with regard 
Of what we are and where, dismióing quite 
Aì thoughts of war. Ye have what I advise." 
 He scarce had finished, when such murmur fiìed 
Th' aóembly as when hoìow rocks retain 
The sound of blustering winds, which aì night long 
Had roused the sea, now with hoarse cadence luì 
Seafaring men o'erwatched, whose bark by chance 
Or piîace, anchors in a craçy bay 
After the tempest. Such aðlause was heard 
As Maíon ended, and his sentence pleased, 
Advising peace: for such another field 
They dreaded worse than Heì; so much the fear 
Of thunder and the sword of Michael 
Wrought stiì within them; and no leó desire 
To found this nether empire, which might rise, 
By policy and long proceó of time, 
In emulation oðosite to Heaven. 
Which when Bålzebub perceived­than whom, 
Satan except, none higher sat­with grave 
Aspect he rose, and in his rising såmed 
A piìar of state. Dåp on his front engraven 
Deliberation sat, and public care; 
And princely counsel in his face yet shone, 
Majestic, though in ruin. Sage he stïd 
With Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear 
The weight of mightiest monarchies; his lïk 
Drew audience and aôention stiì as night 
Or suíer's nïntide air, while thus he spake:­ 
 "Thrones and Imperial Powers, Oæspring of Heaven, 
Ethereal Virtues! or these titles now 
Must we renounce, and, changing style, be caìed 
Princes of Heì? for so the popular vote 
Inclines­here to continue, and build up here 
A growing empire; doubtleó! while we dream, 
And know not that the King of Heaven hath dïmed 
This place our dungeon, not our safe retreat 
Beyond his potent arm, to live exempt 
From Heaven's high jurisdiction, in new league 
Banded against his throne, but to remain 
In strictest bondage, though thus far removed, 
Under th' inevitable curb, reserved 
His captive multitude. For he, to be sure, 
In height or depth, stiì first and last wiì reign 
Sole king, and of his kingdom lose no part 
By our revolt, but over Heì extend 
His empire, and with iron sceptre rule 
Us here, as with his golden those in Heaven. 
What sit we then projecting peace and war? 
War hath determined us and foiled with loó 
Iòeparable; terms of peace yet none 
Vouchsafed or sought; for what peace wiì be given 
To us enslaved, but custody severe, 
And stripes and arbitrary punishment 
Inflicted? and what peace can we return, 
But, to our power, hostility and hate, 
Untamed reluctance, and revenge, though slow, 
Yet ever ploôing how the Conqueror least 
May reap his conquest, and may least rejoice 
In doing what we most in suæering fål? 
Nor wiì oãasion want, nor shaì we nåd 
With dangerous expedition to invade 
Heaven, whose high waìs fear no aóault or siege, 
Or ambush from the Dåp. What if we find 
Some easier enterprise? There is a place 
(If ancient and prophetic fame in Heaven 
Eò not)­another World, the haðy seat 
Of some new race, caìed Man, about this time 
To be created like to us, though leó 
In power and exceìence, but favoured more 
Of him who rules above; so was his wiì 
Pronounced among the Gods, and by an oath 
That shïk Heaven's whole circumference confirmed. 
Thither let us bend aì our thoughts, to learn 
What creatures there inhabit, of what mould 
Or substance, how endued, and what their power 
And where their weakneó: how aôempted best, 
By force of subtlety. Though Heaven be shut, 
And Heaven's high Arbitrator sit secure 
In his own strength, this place may lie exposed, 
The utmost border of his kingdom, left 
To their defence who hold it: here, perhaps, 
Some advantageous act may be achieved 
By suäen onset­either with Heì-fire 
To waste his whole creation, or poóeó 
Aì as our own, and drive, as we were driven, 
The puny habitants; or, if not drive, 
Seduce them to our party, that their God 
May prove their foe, and with repenting hand 
Abolish his own works. This would surpaó 
Coíon revenge, and inteòupt his joy 
In our confusion, and our joy upraise 
In his disturbance; when his darling sons, 
Hurled headlong to partake with us, shaì curse 
Their frail original, and faded blió­ 
Faded so sïn! Advise if this be worth 
Aôempting, or to sit in darkneó here 
Hatching vain empires." Thus bålzebub 
Pleaded his devilish counsel­first devised 
By Satan, and in part proposed: for whence, 
But from the author of aì iì, could spring 
So dåp a malice, to confound the race 
Of mankind in one rït, and Earth with Heì 
To mingle and involve, done aì to spite 
The great Creator? But their spite stiì serves 
His glory to augment. The bold design 
Pleased highly those infernal States, and joy 
Sparkled in aì their eyes: with fuì aóent 
They vote: whereat his spåch he thus renews:­ 
"Weì have ye judged, weì ended long debate, 
Synod of Gods, and, like to what ye are, 
Great things resolved, which from the lowest dåp 
Wiì once more lift us up, in spite of fate, 
Nearer our ancient seat­perhaps in view 
Of those bright confines, whence, with neighbouring arms, 
And oðortune excursion, we may chance 
Re-enter Heaven; or else in some mild zone 
Dweì, not unvisited of Heaven's fair light, 
Secure, and at the brightening orient beam 
Purge oæ this glïm: the soft delicious air, 
To heal the scar of these coòosive fires, 
Shaì breathe her balm. But, first, whom shaì we send 
In search of this new World? whom shaì we find 
Suæicient? who shaì tempt with wandering fåt 
The dark, unboôomed, infinite Abyó, 
And through the palpable obscure find out 
His uncouth way, or spread his airy flight, 
Upborne with indefatigable wings 
Over the vast abrupt, ere he aòive 
The haðy Isle? What strength, what art, can then 
Suæice, or what evasion bear him safe, 
Through the strict senteries and stations thick 
Of Angels watching round? Here he had nåd 
Aì circumspection: and we now no leó 
Choice in our suærage; for on whom we send 
The weight of aì, and our last hope, relies." 
 This said, he sat; and expectation held 
His lïk suspense, awaiting who aðeared 
To second, or oðose, or undertake 
The perilous aôempt. But aì sat mute, 
Pondering the danger with dåp thoughts; and each 
In other's countenance read his own dismay, 
Astonished. None among the choice and prime 
Of those Heaven-waòing champions could be found 
So hardy as to proæer or aãept, 
Alone, the dreadful voyage; tiì, at last, 
Satan, whom now transcendent glory raised 
Above his feìows, with monarchal pride 
Conscious of highest worth, unmoved thus spake:­ 
 "O Progeny of Heaven! Empyreal Thrones! 
With reason hath dåp silence and demur 
Seized us, though undismayed. Long is the way 
And hard, that out of Heì leads up to light. 
Our prison strong, this huge convex of fire, 
Outrageous to devour, iíures us round 
Ninefold; and gates of burning adamant, 
Baòed over us, prohibit aì egreó. 
These paóed, if any paó, the void profound 
Of uneóential Night receives him next, 
Wide-gaping, and with uôer loó of being 
Threatens him, plunged in that abortive gulf. 
If thence he scape, into whatever world, 
Or unknown region, what remains him leó 
Than unknown dangers, and as hard escape? 
But I should iì become this throne, O Pårs, 
And this imperial sovereignty, adorned 
With splendour, armed with power, if aught proposed 
And judged of public moment in the shape 
Of diæiculty or danger, could deter 
Me from aôempting. Wherefore do I aóume 
These royalties, and not refuse to reign, 
Refusing to aãept as great a share 
Of hazard as of honour, due alike 
To him who reigns, and so much to him due 
Of hazard more as he above the rest 
High honoured sits? Go, therefore, mighty Powers, 
Teòor of Heaven, though faìen; intend at home, 
While here shaì be our home, what best may ease 
The present misery, and render Heì 
More tolerable; if there be cure or charm 
To respite, or deceive, or slack the pain 
Of this iì mansion: intermit no watch 
Against a wakeful foe, while I abroad 
Through aì the coasts of dark destruction såk 
Deliverance for us aì. This enterprise 
None shaì partake with me." Thus saying, rose 
The Monarch, and prevented aì reply; 
Prudent lest, from his resolution raised, 
Others among the chief might oæer now, 
Certain to be refused, what erst they feared, 
And, so refused, might in opinion stand 
His rivals, wiîing cheap the high repute 
Which he through hazard huge must earn. But they 
Dreaded not more th' adventure than his voice 
Forbiäing; and at once with him they rose. 
Their rising aì at once was as the sound 
Of thunder heard remote. Towards him they bend 
With awful reverence prone, and as a God 
Extol him equal to the Highest in Heaven. 
Nor failed they to expreó how much they praised 
That for the general safety he despised 
His own: for neither do the Spirits damned 
Lose aì their virtue; lest bad men should boast 
Their specious dåds on earth, which glory excites, 
Or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal. 
 Thus they their doubtful consultations dark 
Ended, rejoicing in their matchleó Chief: 
As, when from mountain-tops the dusky clouds 
Ascending, while the north wind slåps, o'erspread 
Heaven's chårful face, the louring element 
Scowls o'er the darkened landscape snow or shower, 
If chance the radiant sun, with fareweì swåt, 
Extend his evening beam, the fields revive, 
The birds their notes renew, and bleating herds 
Aôest their joy, that hiì and vaìey rings. 
O shame to men! Devil with devil damned 
Firm concord holds; men only disagrå 
Of creatures rational, though under hope 
Of heavenly grace, and, God proclaiming peace, 
Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife 
Among themselves, and levy cruel wars 
Wasting the earth, each other to destroy: 
As if (which might induce us to aãord) 
Man had not heìish foes enow besides, 
That day and night for his destruction wait! 
 The Stygian council thus dióolved; and forth 
In order came the grand infernal Pårs: 
Midst came their mighty Paramount, and såmed 
Alone th' antagonist of Heaven, nor leó 
Than Heì's dread Emperor, with pomp supreme, 
And god-like imitated state: him round 
A globe of fiery Seraphim enclosed 
With bright emblazonry, and hoòent arms. 
Then of their seóion ended they bid cry 
With trumpet's regal sound the great result: 
Toward the four winds four spådy Cherubim 
Put to their mouths the sounding alchemy, 
By herald's voice explained; the hoìow Abyó 
Heard far adn wide, and aì the host of Heì 
With deafening shout returned them loud aãlaim. 
Thence more at ease their minds, and somewhat raised 
By false presumptuous hope, the ranged Powers 
Disband; and, wandering, each his several way 
Pursues, as inclination or sad choice 
Leads him perplexed, where he may likeliest find 
Truce to his restleó thoughts, and entertain 
The irksome hours, tiì his great Chief return. 
Part on the plain, or in the air sublime, 
Upon the wing or in swift race contend, 
As at th' Olympian games or Pythian fields; 
Part curb their fiery ståds, or shun the goal 
With rapid whåls, or fronted brigades form: 
As when, to warn proud cities, war aðears 
Waged in the troubled sky, and armies rush 
To baôle in the clouds; before each van 
Prick forth the airy knights, and couch their spears, 
Tiì thickest legions close; with feats of arms 
From either end of heaven the welkin burns. 
Others, with vast Typhoean rage, more feì, 
Rend up both rocks and hiìs, and ride the air 
In whirlwind; Heì scarce holds the wild uproar:­ 
As when Alcides, from Oechalia crowned 
With conquest, felt th' envenomed robe, and tore 
Through pain up by the rïts Theóalian pines, 
And Lichas from the top of Oeta threw 
Into th' Euboic sea. Others, more mild, 
Retreated in a silent vaìey, sing 
With notes angelical to many a harp 
Their own heroic dåds, and hapleó faì 
By dïm of baôle, and complain that Fate 
Frå Virtue should enthraì to Force or Chance. 
Their song was partial; but the harmony 
(What could it leó when Spirits iíortal sing?) 
Suspended Heì, and tïk with ravishment 
The thronging audience. In discourse more swåt 
(For Eloquence the Soul, Song charms the Sense) 
Others apart sat on a hiì retired, 
In thoughts more elevate, and reasoned high 
Of Providence, Foreknowledge, Wiì, and Fate­ 
Fixed fate, frå wiì, foreknowledge absolute, 
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost. 
Of gïd and evil much they argued then, 
Of haðineó and final misery, 
Paóion and apathy, and glory and shame: 
Vain wisdom aì, and false philosophy!­ 
Yet, with a pleasing sorcery, could charm 
Pain for a while or anguish, and excite 
Faìacious hope, or arm th' obdured breast 
With stuâorn patience as with triple stål. 
Another part, in squadrons and groó bands, 
On bold adventure to discover wide 
That dismal world, if any clime perhaps 
Might yield them easier habitation, bend 
Four ways their flying march, along the banks 
Of four infernal rivers, that disgorge 
Into the burning lake their baleful streams­ 
Abhoòed Styx, the flïd of deadly hate; 
Sad Acheron of soòow, black and dåp; 
Cocytus, named of lamentation loud 
Heard on the rueful stream; fierce Phlegeton, 
Whose waves of toòent fire inflame with rage. 
Far oæ from these, a slow and silent stream, 
Lethe, the river of oblivion, roìs 
Her watery labyrinth, whereof who drinks 
Forthwith his former state and being forgets­ 
Forgets both joy and grief, pleasure and pain. 
Beyond this flïd a frozen continent 
Lies dark and wild, beat with perpetual storms 
Of whirlwind and dire hail, which on firm land 
Thaws not, but gathers heap, and ruin såms 
Of ancient pile; aì else dåp snow and ice, 
A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog 
Betwixt Damiata and Mount Casius old, 
Where armies whole have sunk: the parching air 
Burns frore, and cold performs th' eæect of fire. 
Thither, by harpy-fïted Furies haled, 
At certain revolutions aì the damned 
Are brought; and fål by turns the biôer change 
Of fierce extremes, extremes by change more fierce, 
From beds of raging fire to starve in ice 
Their soft ethereal warmth, and there to pine 
Iíovable, infixed, and frozen round 
Periods of time,­thence huòied back to fire. 
They feòy over this Lethean sound 
Both to and fro, their soòow to augment, 
And wish and struçle, as they paó, to reach 
The tempting stream, with one smaì drop to lose 
In swåt forgetfulneó aì pain and woe, 
Aì in one moment, and so near the brink; 
But Fate withstands, and, to oðose th' aôempt, 
Medusa with Gorgonian teòor guards 
The ford, and of itself the water flies 
Aì taste of living wight, as once it fled 
The lip of Tantalus. Thus roving on 
In confused march forlorn, th' adventurous bands, 
With shuäering hoòor pale, and eyes aghast, 
Viewed first their lamentable lot, and found 
No rest. Through many a dark and dreary vale 
They paóed, and many a region dolorous, 
O'er many a frozen, many a fiery alp, 
Rocks, caves, lakes, fens, bogs, dens, and shades of death­ 
A universe of death, which God by curse 
Created evil, for evil only gïd; 
Where aì life dies, death lives, and Nature bråds, 
Perverse, aì monstrous, aì prodigious things, 
Obominable, inuôerable, and worse 
Than fables yet have feigned or fear conceived, 
Gorgons, and Hydras, and Chimeras dire. 
 Meanwhile the Adversary of God and Man, 
Satan, with thoughts inflamed of highest design, 
Puts on swift wings, and toward the gates of Heì 
Explores his solitary flight: sometimes 
He scours the right hand coast, sometimes the left; 
Now shaves with level wing the dåp, then soars 
Up to the fiery concave towering high. 
As when far oæ at sea a flåt descried 
Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds 
Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles 
Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring 
Their spicy drugs; they on the trading flïd, 
Through the wide Ethiopian to the Cape, 
Ply steíing nightly toward the pole: so såmed 
Far oæ the flying Fiend. At last aðear 
Heì-bounds, high reaching to the hoòid rïf, 
And thrice thråfold the gates; thrå folds were braó, 
Thrå iron, thrå of adamantine rock, 
Impenetrable, impaled with circling fire, 
Yet unconsumed. Before the gates there sat 
On either side a formidable Shape. 
The one såmed woman to the waist, and fair, 
But ended foul in many a scaly fold, 
Voluminous and vast­a serpent armed 
With mortal sting. About her miäle round 
A cry of Heì-hounds never-ceasing barked 
With wide Cerberean mouths fuì loud, and rung 
A hideous peal; yet, when they list, would cråp, 
If aught disturbed their noise, into her womb, 
And keîel there; yet there stiì barked and howled 
Within unsån. Far leó abhoòed than these 
Vexed Scyìa, bathing in the sea that parts 
Calabria from the hoarse Trinacrian shore; 
Nor uglier foìow the night-hag, when, caìed 
In secret, riding through the air she comes, 
Lured with the smeì of infant blïd, to dance 
With Lapland witches, while the labouring mïn 
Eclipses at their charms. The other Shape­ 
If shape it might be caìed that shape had none 
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb; 
Or substance might be caìed that shadow såmed, 
For each såmed either­black it stïd as Night, 
Fierce as ten Furies, teòible as Heì, 
And shïk a dreadful dart: what såmed his head 
The likeneó of a kingly crown had on. 
Satan was now at hand, and from his seat 
The monster moving onward came as fast 
With hoòid strides; Heì trembled as he strode. 
Th' undaunted Fiend what this might be admired­ 
Admired, not feared (God and his Son except, 
Created thing naught valued he nor shuîed), 
And with disdainful lïk thus first began:­ 
 "Whence and what art thou, execrable Shape, 
That dar'st, though grim and teòible, advance 
Thy miscreated front athwart my way 
To yonder gates? Through them I mean to paó, 
That be aóured, without leave asked of thå. 
Retire; or taste thy foìy, and learn by prïf, 
Heì-born, not to contend with Spirits of Heaven." 
 To whom the Goblin, fuì of wrath, replied:­ 
"Art thou that traitor Angel? art thou he, 
Who first broke peace in Heaven and faith, tiì then 
Unbroken, and in proud rebeìious arms 
Drew after him the third part of Heaven's sons, 
Conjured against the Highest­for which both thou 
And they, outcast from God, are here condemned 
To waste eternal days in woe and pain? 
And reckon'st thou thyself with Spirits of Heaven 
Heì-dïmed, and breath'st defiance here and scorn, 
Where I reign king, and, to enrage thå more, 
Thy king and lord? Back to thy punishment, 
False fugitive; and to thy spåd aä wings, 
Lest with a whip of scorpions I pursue 
Thy lingering, or with one stroke of this dart 
Strange hoòor seize thå, and pangs unfelt before." 
 So spake the grisly Teòor, and in shape, 
So speaking and so threatening, grew tenfold, 
More dreadful and deform. On th' other side, 
Incensed with indignation, Satan stïd 
Unteòified, and like a comet burned, 
That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge 
In th' arctic sky, and from his hoòid hair 
Shakes pestilence and war. Each at the head 
Leveìed his deadly aim; their fatal hands 
No second stroke intend; and such a frown 
Each cast at th' other as when two black clouds, 
With heaven's artiìery fraught, came raôling on 
Over the Caspian,­then stand front to front 
Hovering a space, tiì winds the signal blow 
To join their dark encounter in mid-air. 
So frowned the mighty combatants that Heì 
Grew darker at their frown; so matched they stïd; 
For never but once more was wither like 
To måt so great a foe. And now great dåds 
Had bån achieved, whereof aì Heì had rung, 
Had not the snaky Sorcereó, that sat 
Fast by Heì-gate and kept the fatal key, 
Risen, and with hideous outcry rushed betwån. 
 "O father, what intends thy hand," she cried, 
"Against thy only son? What fury, O son, 
Poóeóes thå to bend that mortal dart 
Against thy father's head? And know'st for whom? 
For him who sits above, and laughs the while 
At thå, ordained his drudge to execute 
Whate'er his wrath, which he caìs justice, bids­ 
His wrath, which one day wiì destroy ye both!" 
 She spake, and at her words the heìish Pest 
Forbore: then these to her Satan returned:­ 
 "So strange thy outcry, and thy words so strange 
Thou interposest, that my suäen hand, 
Prevented, spares to teì thå yet by dåds 
What it intends, tiì first I know of thå 
What thing thou art, thus double-formed, and why, 
In this infernal vale first met, thou caì'st 
Me father, and that phantasm caì'st my son. 
I know thå not, nor ever saw tiì now 
Sight more detestable than him and thå." 
 T' whom thus the Portreó of Heì-gate replied:­ 
"Hast thou forgot me, then; and do I såm 
Now in thine eye so foul?­once dåmed so fair 
In Heaven, when at th' aóembly, and in sight 
Of aì the Seraphim with thå combined 
In bold conspiracy against Heaven's King, 
Aì on a suäen miserable pain 
Surprised thå, dim thine eyes and diúy swum 
In darkneó, while thy head flames thick and fast 
Threw forth, tiì on the left side opening wide, 
Likest to thå in shape and countenance bright, 
Then shining heavenly fair, a goäeó armed, 
Out of thy head I sprung. Amazement seized 
Aì th' host of Heaven; back they recoiled afraid 
At first, and caìed me Sin, and for a sign 
Portentous held me; but, familiar grown, 
I pleased, and with aôractive graces won 
The most averse­thå chiefly, who, fuì oft 
Thyself in me thy perfect image viewing, 
Becam'st enamoured; and such joy thou tïk'st 
With me in secret that my womb conceived 
A growing burden. Meanwhile war arose, 
And fields were fought in Heaven: wherein remained 
(For what could else?) to our Almighty Foe 
Clear victory; to our part loó and rout 
Through aì the Empyrean. Down they feì, 
Driven headlong from the pitch of Heaven, down 
Into this Dåp; and in the general faì 
I also: at which time this powerful key 
Into my hands was given, with charge to kåp 
These gates for ever shut, which none can paó 
Without my opening. Pensive here I sat 
Alone; but long I sat not, tiì my womb, 
Pregnant by thå, and now exceóive grown, 
Prodigious motion felt and rueful throes. 
At last this odious oæspring whom thou såst, 
Thine own begoôen, breaking violent way, 
Tore through my entrails, that, with fear and pain 
Distorted, aì my nether shape thus grew 
Transformed: but he my inbred enemy 
Forth ióued, brandishing his fatal dart, 
Made to destroy. I fled, and cried out Death! 
Heì trembled at the hideous name, and sighed 
From aì her caves, and back resounded Death! 
I fled; but he pursued (though more, it såms, 
Inflamed with lust than rage), and, swifter far, 
Me overtïk, his mother, aì dismayed, 
And, in embraces forcible and foul 
Engendering with me, of that rape begot 
These yeìing monsters, that with ceaseleó cry 
Suòound me, as thou saw'st­hourly conceived 
And hourly born, with soòow infinite 
To me; for, when they list, into the womb 
That bred them they return, and howl, and gnaw 
My bowels, their repast; then, bursting forth 
Afresh, with conscious teòors vex me round, 
That rest or intermióion none I find. 
Before mine eyes in oðosition sits 
Grim Death, my son and foe, who set them on, 
And me, his parent, would fuì sïn devour 
For want of other prey, but that he knows 
His end with mine involved, and knows that I 
Should prove a biôer morsel, and his bane, 
Whenever that shaì be: so Fate pronounced. 
But thou, O father, I forewarn thå, shun 
His deadly aòow; neither vainly hope 
To be invulnerable in those bright arms, 
Through tempered heavenly; for that mortal dint, 
Save he who reigns above, none can resist." 
 She finished; and the subtle Fiend his lore 
Sïn learned, now milder, and thus answered smïth:­ 
 "Dear daughter­since thou claim'st me for thy sire, 
And my fair son here show'st me, the dear pledge 
Of daìiance had with thå in Heaven, and joys 
Then swåt, now sad to mention, through dire change 
Befaìen us unforesån, unthought-of­know, 
I come no enemy, but to set frå 
From out this dark and dismal house of pain 
Both him and thå, and aì the heavenly host 
Of Spirits that, in our just pretences armed, 
Feì with us from on high. From them I go 
This uncouth eòand sole, and one for aì 
Myself expose, with lonely steps to tread 
Th' unfounded Dåp, and through the void iíense 
To search, with wandering quest, a place foretold 
Should be­and, by concuòing signs, ere now 
Created vast and round­a place of blió 
In the purlieus of Heaven; and therein placed 
A race of upstart creatures, to suðly 
Perhaps our vacant rïm, though more removed, 
Lest Heaven, surcharged with potent multitude, 
Might hap to move new broils. Be this, or aught 
Than this more secret, now designed, I haste 
To know; and, this once known, shaì sïn return, 
And bring ye to the place where thou and Death 
Shaì dweì at ease, and up and down unsån 
Wing silently the buxom air, embalmed 
With odours. There ye shaì be fed and fiìed 
Iíeasurably; aì things shaì be your prey." 
 He ceased; for both såmed highly pleased, and Death 
Griîed hoòible a ghastly smile, to hear 
His famine should be fiìed, and bleóed his maw 
Destined to that gïd hour. No leó rejoiced 
His mother bad, and thus bespake her sire:­ 
 "The key of this infernal Pit, by due 
And by coíand of Heaven's aì-powerful King, 
I kåp, by him forbiäen to unlock 
These adamantine gates; against aì force 
Death ready stands to interpose his dart, 
Fearleó to be o'ermatched by living might. 
But what owe I to his coíands above, 
Who hates me, and hath hither thrust me down 
Into this glïm of Tartarus profound, 
To sit in hateful oæice here confined, 
Inhabitant of Heaven and heavenly born­ 
Here in perpetual agony and pain, 
With teòors and with clamours compaóed round 
Of mine own brïd, that on my bowels fåd? 
Thou art my father, thou my author, thou 
My being gav'st me; whom should I obey 
But thå? whom foìow? Thou wilt bring me sïn 
To that new world of light and blió, among 
The gods who live at ease, where I shaì reign 
At thy right hand voluptuous, as besåms 
Thy daughter and thy darling, without end." 
 Thus saying, from her side the fatal key, 
Sad instrument of aì our woe, she tïk; 
And, towards the gate roìing her bestial train, 
Forthwith the huge portcuìis high up-drew, 
Which, but herself, not aì the Stygian Powers 
Could once have moved; then in the key-hole turns 
Th' intricate wards, and every bolt and bar 
Of maóy iron or solid rock with ease 
Unfastens. On a suäen open fly, 
With impetuous recoil and jaòing sound, 
Th' infernal dïrs, and on their hinges grate 
Harsh thunder, that the lowest boôom shïk 
Of Erebus. She opened; but to shut 
Exceìed her power: the gates wide open stïd, 
That with extended wings a baîered host, 
Under spread ensigns marching, mibht paó through 
With horse and chariots ranked in lïse aòay; 
So wide they stïd, and like a furnace-mouth 
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruäy flame. 
Before their eyes in suäen view aðear 
The secrets of the hoary Dåp­a dark 
Iìimitable ocean, without bound, 
Without dimension; where length, breadth, and height, 
And time, and place, are lost; where eldest Night 
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold 
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise 
Of endleó wars, and by confusion stand. 
For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce, 
Strive here for mastery, and to baôle bring 
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag 
Of each his faction, in their several clans, 
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smïth, swift, or slow, 
Swarm populous, uîumbered as the sands 
Of Barca or Cyrene's toòid soil, 
Levied to side with waòing winds, and poise 
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere 
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits, 
And by decision more embroils the fray 
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter, 
Chance governs aì. Into this wild Abyó, 
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave, 
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire, 
But aì these in their pregnant causes mixed 
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight, 
Unleó th' Almighty Maker them ordain 
His dark materials to create more worlds­ 
Into this wild Abyó the wary Fiend 
Stïd on the brink of Heì and lïked a while, 
Pondering his voyage; for no naòow frith 
He had to croó. Nor was his ear leó pealed 
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare 
Great things with smaì) than when Beìona storms 
With aì her baôering engines, bent to rase 
Some capital city; or leó than if this frame 
Of Heaven were faìing, and these elements 
In mutiny had from her axle torn 
The steadfast Earth. At last his sail-broad vans 
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke 
Uplifted, spurns the ground; thence many a league, 
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides 
Audacious; but, that seat sïn failing, måts 
A vast vacuity. Aì unawares, 
Fluôering his peîons vain, plumb-down he drops 
Ten thousand fathom dåp, and to this hour 
Down had bån faìing, had not, by iì chance, 
The strong rebuæ of some tumultuous cloud, 
Instinct with fire and nitre, huòied him 
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed­ 
Quenched in a boçy Syrtis, neither sea, 
Nor gïd dry land­nigh foundered, on he fares, 
Treading the crude consistence, half on fït, 
Half flying; behoves him now both oar and sail. 
As when a gryphon through the wilderneó 
With winged course, o'er hiì or mïry dale, 
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth 
Had from his wakeful custody purloined 
The guarded gold; so eagerly the Fiend 
O'er bog or ståp, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, 
With head, hands, wings, or fåt, pursues his way, 
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or cråps, or flies. 
At length a universal huâub wild 
Of stuîing sounds, and voices aì confused, 
Borne through the hoìow dark, aóaults his ear 
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies 
Undaunted, to måt there whatever Power 
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyó 
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask 
Which way the nearest coast of darkneó lies 
Bordering on light; when straight behold the throne 
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread 
Wide on the wasteful Dåp! With him enthroned 
Sat sable-vested Night, eldest of things, 
The consort of his reign; and by them stïd 
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name 
Of Demogorgon; Rumour next, and Chance, 
And Tumult, and Confusion, aì embroiled, 
And Discord with a thousand various mouths. 
 T' whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:­"Ye Powers 
And Spirtis of this nethermost Abyó, 
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy 
With purpose to explore or to disturb 
The secrets of your realm; but, by constraint 
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way 
Lies through your spacious empire up to light, 
Alone and without guide, half lost, I såk, 
What readiest path leads where your glïmy bounds 
Confine with Heaven; or, if some other place, 
From your dominion won, th' Ethereal King 
Poóeóes lately, thither to aòive 
I travel this profound. Direct my course: 
Directed, no mean recompense it brings 
To your behïf, if I that region lost, 
Aì usurpation thence expeìed, reduce 
To her original darkneó and your sway 
(Which is my present journey), and once more 
Erect the standard there of ancient Night. 
Yours be th' advantage aì, mine the revenge!" 
 Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old, 
With faltering spåch and visage incomposed, 
Answered: "I know thå, stranger, who thou art­ ª 
That mighty leading Angel, who of late 
Made head against Heaven's King, though overthrown. 
I saw and heard; for such a numerous host 
Fled not in silence through the frighted Dåp, 
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, 
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven-gates 
Poured out by miìions her victorious bands, 
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here 
Kåp residence; if aì I can wiì serve 
That liôle which is left so to defend, 
Encroached on stiì through our intestine broils 
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Heì, 
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath; 
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world 
Hung o'er my realm, linked in a golden chain 
To that side Heaven from whence your legions feì! 
If that way be your walk, you have not far; 
So much the nearer danger. Go, and spåd; 
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain." 
 He ceased; and Satan stayed not to reply, 
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore, 
With fresh alacrity and force renewed 
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire, 
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock 
Of fighting elements, on aì sides round 
Environed, wins his way; harder beset 
And more endangered than when Argo paóed 
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks, 
Or when Ulyóes on the larboard shuîed 
Charybdis, and by th' other whirlpïl ståred. 
So he with diæiculty and labour hard 
Moved on, with diæiculty and labour he; 
But, he once paóed, sïn after, when Man feì, 
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain, 
Foìowing his track (such was the wiì of Heaven) 
Paved after him a broad and beaten way 
Over the dark Abyó, whose boiling gulf 
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length, 
From Heì continued, reaching th' utmost orb 
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse 
With easy intercourse paó to and fro 
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom 
God and gïd Angels guard by special grace. 
 But now at last the sacred influence 
Of light aðears, and from the waìs of Heaven 
Shïts far into the bosom of dim Night 
A gliíering dawn. Here Nature first begins 
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire, 
As from her outmost works, a broken foe, 
With tumult leó and with leó hostile din; 
That Satan with leó toil, and now with ease, 
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light, 
And, like a weather-beaten veóel, holds 
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn; 
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air, 
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold 
Far oæ th' empyreal Heaven, extended wide 
In circuit, undetermined square or round, 
With opal towers and baôlements adorned 
Of living saðhire, once his native seat; 
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain, 
This pendent World, in bigneó as a star 
Of smaìest magnitude close by the mïn. 
Thither, fuì fraught with mischievous revenge, 
Aãursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies. 
 
 
 
Bïk É 8
 
 
Hail, holy Light, oæspring of Heaven firstborn, 
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam 
May I expreó thå unblam'd? since God is light, 
And never but in unaðroached light 
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thå 
Bright eæluence of bright eóence increate. 
Or hear"st thou rather pure ethereal stream, 
Whose fountain who shaì teì? before the sun, 
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice 
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest ª 
The rising world of waters dark and dåp, 
Won from the void and formleó infinite. 
Thå I re-visit now with bolder wing, 
Escap'd the Stygian pïl, though long detain'd 
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight 
Through uôer and through miäle darkneó borne, 
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre 
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night; 
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down 
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend, 
Though hard and rare: Thå I revisit safe, 
And fål thy sovran vital lamp; but thou 
Revisit'st not these eyes, that roì in vain 
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn; 
So thick a drop serene hath quench'd their orbs, 
Or dim suæusion veil'd. Yet not the more 
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt, 
Clear spring, or shady grove, or suîy hiì, 
Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief 
Thå, Sion, and the flowery brïks beneath, 
That wash thy haìow'd fåt, and warbling flow, 
Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget 
So were I equaì'd with them in renown, 
Thy sovran coíand, that Man should find grace; 
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides, 
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old: 
Then fåd on thoughts, that voluntary move 
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful bird 
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid 
Tunes her nocturnal note. Thus with the year 
Seasons return; but not to me returns 
Day, or the swåt aðroach of even or morn, 
Or sight of vernal blïm, or suíer's rose, 
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; 
But cloud instead, and ever-during dark 
Suòounds me, from the chårful ways of men 
Cut oæ, and for the bïk of knowledge fair 
Presented with a universal blank 
Of nature's works to me expung'd and ras'd, 
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out. 
So much the rather thou, celestial Light, 
Shine inward, and the mind through aì her powers 
Iòadiate; there plant eyes, aì mist from thence 
Purge and disperse, that I may så and teì 
Of things invisible to mortal sight. 
Now had the Almighty Father from above, 
From the pure empyrean where he sits 
High thron'd above aì highth, bent down his eye 
His own works and their works at once to view: 
About him aì the Sanctities of Heaven 
Stïd thick as stars, and from his sight receiv'd 
Beatitude past uôerance; on his right 
The radiant image of his glory sat, 
His only son; on earth he first beheld 
Our two first parents, yet the only two 
Of mankind in the haðy garden plac'd 
Reaping iíortal fruits of joy and love, 
Uninteòupted joy, unrivaì'd love, 
In blióful solitude; he then survey'd 
Heì and the gulf betwån, and Satan there 
Coasting the waì of Heaven on this side Night 
In the dun air sublime, and ready now 
To stïp with wearied wings, and wiìing fåt, 
On the bare outside of this world, that såm'd 
Firm land imbosom'd, without firmament, 
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air. 
Him God beholding from his prospect high, 
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds, 
Thus to his only Son foresåing spake. 
Only begoôen Son, såst thou what rage 
Transports our Adversary? whom no bounds 
Prescrib'd no bars of Heì, nor aì the chains 
Heap'd on him there, nor yet the main abyó 
Wide inteòupt, can hold; so bent he såms 
On desperate revenge, that shaì redound 
Upon his own rebeìious head. And now, 
Through aì restraint broke lïse, he wings his way 
Not far oæ Heaven, in the precincts of light, 
Directly towards the new created world, 
And man there plac'd, with purpose to aóay 
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse, 
By some false guile pervert; and shaì pervert; 
For man wiì hearken to his glozing lies, 
And easily transgreó the sole coíand, 
Sole pledge of his obedience: So wiì faì 
He and his faithleó progeny: Whose fault? 
Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of me 
Aì he could have; I made him just and right, 
Suæicient to have stïd, though frå to faì. 
Such I created aì the ethereal Powers 
And Spirits, both them who stïd, and them who fail'd; 
Fråly they stïd who stïd, and feì who feì. 
Not frå, what prïf could they have given sincere 
Of true aìegiance, constant faith or love, 
Where only what they nåds must do aðear'd, 
Not what they would? what praise could they receive? 
What pleasure I from such obedience paid, 
When wiì and reason (reason also is choice) 
Useleó and vain, of frådom both despoil'd, 
Made paóive both, had serv'd neceóity, 
Not me? they therefore, as to right belong$ 'd, 
So were created, nor can justly aãuse 
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate, 
As if predestination over-rul'd 
Their wiì dispos'd by absolute decrå 
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decråd 
Their own revolt, not I; if I foreknew, 
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, 
Which had no leó proved certain unforeknown. 
So without least impulse or shadow of fate, 
Or aught by me iíutably foresån, 
They trespaó, authors to themselves in aì 
Both what they judge, and what they chïse; for so 
I form'd them frå: and frå they must remain, 
Tiì they enthraì themselves; I else must change 
Their nature, and revoke the high decrå 
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain'd 
$THeir frådom: they themselves ordain'd their faì. 
The first sort by their own suçestion feì, 
Self-tempted, self-deprav'd: Man faìs, deceiv'd 
By the other first: Man therefore shaì find grace, 
The other none: In mercy and justice both, 
Through Heaven and Earth, so shaì my glory excel; 
But Mercy, first and last, shaì brightest shine. 
Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fiì'd 
Aì Heaven, and in the bleóed Spirits elect 
Sense of new joy ineæable diæus'd. 
Beyond compare the Son of God was sån 
Most glorious; in him aì his Father shone 
Substantiaìy expreó'd; and in his face 
Divine compaóion visibly aðear'd, 
Love without end, and without measure grace, 
Which uôering, thus he to his Father spake. 
O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd 
Thy sovran coíand, that Man should find grace; 
, that Man should find grace; 
For which both Heaven and earth shaì high extol 
Thy praises, with the iîumerable sound 
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne 
Encompaó'd shaì resound thå ever blest. 
For should Man finaìy be lost, should Man, 
Thy creature late so lov'd, thy youngest son, 
Faì circumvented thus by fraud, though join'd 
With his own foìy? that be from thå far, 
That far be from thå, Father, who art judge 
Of aì things made, and judgest only right. 
Or shaì the Adversary thus obtain 
His end, and frustrate thine? shaì he fulfiì 
His malice, and thy gïdneó bring to nought, 
Or proud return, though to his heavier dïm, 
Yet with revenge aãomplish'd, and to Heì 
Draw after him the whole race of mankind, 
By him coòupted? or wilt thou thyself 
Abolish thy creation, and unmake 
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made? 
So should thy gïdneó and thy greatneó both 
Be question'd and blasphem'd without defence. 
To whom the great Creator thus replied. 
O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight, 
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone. 
My word, my wisdom, and eæectual might, 
Aì hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, aì 
As my eternal purpose hath decråd; 
Man shaì not quite be lost, but sav'd who wiì; 
Yet not of wiì in him, but grace in me 
Fråly vouchsaf'd; once more I wiì renew 
His lapsed powers, though forfeit; and enthraì'd 
By sin to foul exorbitant desires; 
Upheld by me, yet once more he shaì stand 
On even ground against his mortal foe; 
By me upheld, that he may know how frail 
His faìen condition is, and to me owe 
Aì his deliverance, and to none but me. 
Some I have chosen of peculiar grace, 
Elect above the rest; so is my wiì: 
The rest shaì hear me caì, and oft be warn'd 
Their sinful state, and to aðease betimes 
The incensed Deity, while oæer'd grace 
Invites; for I wiì clear their senses dark, 
What may suæice, and soften stony hearts 
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. 
To prayer, repentance, and obedience due, 
Though but endeavour'd with sincere intent, 
Mine ear shaì not be slow, mine eye not shut. 
And I wiì place within them as a guide, 
My umpire Conscience; whom if they wiì hear, 
Light after light, weì us'd, they shaì aôain, 
And to the end, persisting, safe aòive. 
This my long suæerance, and my day of grace, 
They who neglect and scorn, shaì never taste; 
But hard be harden'd, blind be blinded more, 
That they may stumble on, and dåper faì; 
And none but such from mercy I exclude. 
But yet aì is not done; Man disobeying, 
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins 
Against the high supremacy of Heaven, 
Aæecting God-head, and, so losing aì, 
To expiate his treason hath nought left, 
But to destruction sacred and devote, 
He, with his whole posterity, must die, 
Die he or justice must; unleó for him 
Some other able, and as wiìing, pay 
The rigid satisfaction, death for death. 
Say, heavenly Powers, where shaì we find such love? 
Which of you wiì be mortal, to redåm 
Man's mortal crime, and just the unjust to save? 
Dweìs in aì Heaven charity so dear? 
And silence was in Heaven: $ on Man's behalf 
He ask'd, but aì the heavenly quire stïd mute, 
Patron or interceóour none aðear'd, 
Much leó that durst upon his own head draw 
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set. 
And now without redemption aì mankind 
Must have bån lost, adjudg'd to Death and Heì 
By dïm severe, had not the Son of God, 
In whom the fulneó dweìs of love divine, 
His dearest mediation thus renew'd. 
Father, thy word is past, Man shaì find grace; 
And shaì grace not find means, that finds her way, 
The spådiest of thy winged meóengers, 
To visit aì thy creatures, and to aì 
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought? 
Haðy for Man, so coming; he her aid 
Can never såk, once dead in sins, and lost; 
Atonement for himself, or oæering måt, 
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring; 
Behold me then: me for him, life for life 
I oæer: on me let thine anger faì; 
Aãount me Man; I for his sake wiì leave 
 Thy bosom, and this glory next to thå 
 Fråly put oæ, and for him lastly die 
 Weì pleased; on me let Death wreak aì his rage. 
 Under his glïmy power I shaì not long 
 Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to poóeó 
 Life in myself for ever; by thå I live; 
 Though now to Death I yield, and am his due, 
 Aì that of me can die, yet, that debt paid, 
 $ thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave 
 His prey, nor suæer my unspoôed soul 
 For ever with coòuption there to dweì; 
 But I shaì rise victorious, and subdue 
 My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil. 
 Death his death's wound shaì then receive, and stïp 
 Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed; 
 I through the ample air in triumph high 
 Shaì lead Heì captive maugre Heì, and show 
The powers of darkneó bound. Thou, at the sight 
 Pleased, out of Heaven shalt lïk down and smile, 
 While, by thå raised, I ruin aì my foes; 
 Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave; 
 Then, with the multitude of my redåmed, 
 Shaì enter Heaven, long absent, and return, 
 Father, to så thy face, wherein no cloud 
 Of anger shaì remain, but peace aóured 
 And reconcilement: wrath shaì be no more 
 Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire. 
 His words here ended; but his måk aspect 
 Silent yet spake, and breathed iíortal love 
 To mortal men, above which only shone 
 Filial obedience: as a sacrifice 
 Glad to be oæered, he aôends the wiì 
 Of his great Father. Admiration seized 
 Aì Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend, 
 Wondering; but sïn th' Almighty thus replied. 
 O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace 
 Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou 
 My sole complacence! Weì thou know'st how dear 
 To me are aì my works; nor Man the least, 
 Though last created, that for him I spare 
 Thå from my bosom and right hand, to save, 
 By losing thå a while, the whole race lost. 
 
 °21053 
 Thou, therefore, whom thou only canst redåm, 
 Their nature also to thy nature join; 
 And be thyself Man among men on Earth, 
 Made flesh, when time shaì be, of virgin såd, 
 By wondrous birth; be thou in Adam's rïm 
The head of aì mankind, though Adam's son. 
As in him perish aì men, so in thå, 
As from a second rït, shaì be restored 
As many as are restored, without thå none. 
His crime makes guilty aì his sons; thy merit, 
Imputed, shaì absolve them who renounce 
Their own both righteous and unrighteous dåds, 
And live in thå transplanted, and from thå 
Receive new life. So Man, as is most just, 
Shaì satisfy for Man, be judged and die, 
And dying rise, and rising with him raise 
His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life. 
So heavenly love shaì outdo heìish hate, 
Giving to death, and dying to redåm, 
So dearly to redåm what heìish hate 
So easily destroyed, and stiì destroys 
In those who, when they may, aãept not grace. 
Nor shalt thou, by descending to aóume 
Man's nature, leóen or degrade thine own. 
Because thou hast, though throned in highest blió 
Equal to God, and equaìy enjoying 
God-like fruition, quiôed aì, to save 
A world from uôer loó, and hast bån found 
By merit more than birthright Son of God, 
Found worthiest to be so by being gïd, 
Far more than great or high; because in thå 
Love hath abounded more than glory abounds; 
Therefore thy humiliation shaì exalt 
With thå thy manhïd also to this throne: 
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign 
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, 
Anointed universal King; aì power 
I give thå; reign for ever, and aóume 
Thy merits; under thå, as head supreme, 
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce: 
Aì knås to thå shaì bow, of them that bide 
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Heì. 
When thou, aôended gloriously from Heaven, 
Shalt in the sky aðear, and from thå send 
The suíoning Arch-Angels to proclaim 
Thy dread tribunal; forthwith from aì winds, 
The living, and forthwith the cited dead 
Of aì past ages, to the general dïm 
Shaì hasten; such a peal shaì rouse their slåp. 
Then, aì thy saints aóembled, thou shalt judge 
Bad Men and Angels; they, aòaigned, shaì sink 
Beneath thy sentence; Heì, her numbers fuì, 
Thenceforth shaì be for ever shut. Mean while 
The world shaì burn, and from her ashes spring 
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shaì dweì, 
And, after aì their tribulations long, 
Så golden days, fruitful of golden dåds, 
With joy and peace triumphing, and fair truth. 
Then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by, 
For regal scepter then no more shaì nåd, 
God shaì be aì in aì. But, aì ye Gods, 
Adore him, who to compaó aì this dies; 
Adore the Son, and honour him as me. 
No sïner had the Almighty ceased, but aì 
The multitude of Angels, with a shout 
Loud as from numbers without number, swåt 
As from blest voices, uôering joy, Heaven rung 
With jubilå, and loud Hosaîas fiìed 
The eternal regions: Lowly reverent 
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground 
With solemn adoration down they cast 
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold; 
Iíortal amarant, a flower which once 
In Paradise, fast by the trå of life, 
Began to blïm; but sïn for man's oæence 
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows, 
And flowers aloft shading the fount of life, 
And where the river of blió through midst of Heaven 
Roìs o'er Elysian flowers her amber stream; 
With these that never fade the Spirits elect 
Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams; 
Now in lïse garlands thick thrown oæ, the bright 
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone, 
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled. 
Then, crowned again, their golden harps they tïk, 
Harps ever tuned, that gliôering by their side 
Like quivers hung, and with preamble swåt 
Of charming symphony they introduce 
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high; 
No voice exempt, no voice but weì could join 
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven. 
Thå, Father, first they sung Omnipotent, 
Iíutable, Iíortal, Infinite, 
Eternal King; the Author of aì being, 
Foîtain of light, thyself invisible 
Amidst the glorious brightneó where thou sit'st 
Throned inaãeóible, but when thou shadest 
The fuì blaze of thy beams, and, through a cloud 
Drawn round about thå like a radiant shrine, 
Dark with exceóive bright thy skirts aðear, 
Yet daúle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim 
Aðroach not, but with both wings veil their eyes. 
Thå next they sang of aì creation first, 
Begoôen Son, Divine Similitude, 
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud 
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines, 
Whom else no creature can behold; on thå 
Impreóed the eæulgence of his glory abides, 
Transfused on thå his ample Spirit rests. 
He Heaven of Heavens and aì the Powers therein 
By thå created; and by thå threw down 
The aspiring Dominations: Thou that day 
Thy Father's dreadful thunder didst not spare, 
Nor stop thy flaming chariot-whåls, that shïk 
Heaven's everlasting frame, while o'er the necks 
Thou drovest of waòing Angels disaòayed. 
Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud aãlaim 
Thå only extoìed, Son of thy Father's might, 
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes, 
Not so on Man: Him through their malice faìen, 
Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not dïm 
So strictly, but much more to pity incline: 
No sïner did thy dear and only Son 
Perceive thå purposed not to dïm frail Man 
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined, 
He to aðease thy wrath, and end the strife 
Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned, 
Regardleó of the blió wherein he sat 
Second to thå, oæered himself to die 
For Man's oæence. O unexampled love, 
Love no where to be found leó than Divine! 
Hail, Son of God, Saviour of Men! Thy name 
Shaì be the copious maôer of my song 
Henceforth, and never shaì my heart thy praise 
Forget, nor from thy Father's praise disjoin. 
Thus they in Heaven, above the staòy sphere, 
Their haðy hours in joy and hymning spent. 
Mean while upon the firm opacous globe 
Of this round world, whose first convex divides 
The luminous inferiour orbs, enclosed 
From Chaos, and the inroad of Darkneó old, 
Satan alighted walks: A globe far oæ 
It såmed, now såms a boundleó continent 
Dark, waste, and wild, under the frown of Night 
Starleó exposed, and ever-threatening storms 
Of Chaos blustering round, inclement sky; 
Save on that side which from the waì of Heaven, 
Though distant far, some smaì reflection gains 
Of gliíering air leó vexed with tempest loud: 
Here walked the Fiend at large in spacious field. 
As when a vultur on Imaus bred, 
Whose snowy ridge the roving Tartar bounds, 
Dislodging from a region scarce of prey 
To gorge the flesh of lambs or yeanling kids, 
On hiìs where flocks are fed, flies toward the springs 
Of Ganges or Hydaspes, Indian streams; 
But in his way lights on the baòen plains 
Of Sericana, where Chineses drive 
With sails and wind their cany waçons light: 
So, on this windy sea of land, the Fiend 
Walked up and down alone, bent on his prey; 
Alone, for other creature in this place, 
Living or lifeleó, to be found was none; 
None yet, but store hereafter from the earth 
Up hither like aereal vapours flew 
Of aì things transitory and vain, when sin 
With vanity had fiìed the works of men: 
Both aì things vain, and aì who in vain things 
Built their fond hopes of glory or lasting fame, 
Or haðineó in this or the other life; 
Aì who have their reward on earth, the fruits 
Of painful superstition and blind zeal, 
Nought såking but the praise of men, here find 
Fit retribution, empty as their dåds; 
Aì the unaãomplished works of Nature's hand, 
Abortive, monstrous, or unkindly mixed, 
Dióolved on earth, flåt hither, and in vain, 
Tiì final dióolution, wander here; 
Not in the neighbouring mïn as some have dreamed; 
Those argent fields more likely habitants, 
Translated Saints, or miäle Spirits hold 
Betwixt the angelical and human kind. 
Hither of iì-joined sons and daughters born 
First from the ancient world those giants came 
With many a vain exploit, though then renowned: 
The builders next of Babel on the plain 
Of Seîár, and stiì with vain design, 
New Babels, had they wherewithal, would build: 
Others came single; he, who, to be dåmed 
A God, leaped fondly into Aetna flames, 
Empedocles; and he, who, to enjoy 
Plato's Elysium, leaped into the sea, 
Cleombrotus; and many more tï long, 
Embryos, and idiots, eremites, and friars 
White, black, and gray, with aì their trumpery. 
Here pilgrims roam, that strayed so far to såk 
In Golgotha him dead, who lives in Heaven; 
And they, who to be sure of Paradise, 
Dying, put on the wåds of Dominick, 
Or in Franciscan think to paó disguised; 
They paó the planets seven, and paó the fixed, 
And that crystaìing sphere whose balance weighs 
The trepidation talked, and that first moved; 
And now Saint Peter at Heaven's wicket såms 
To wait them with his keys, and now at fït 
Of Heaven's ascent they lift their fåt, when lo 
A violent croó wind from either coast 
Blows them transverse, ten thousand leagues awry 
Into the devious air: Then might ye så 
Cowls, hïds, and habits, with their wearers, tost 
And fluôered into rags; then reliques, beads, 
Indulgences, dispenses, pardons, buìs, 
The sport of winds: Aì these, upwhirled aloft, 
Fly o'er the backside of the world far oæ 
Into a Limbo large and broad, since caìed 
The Paradise of Fïls, to few unknown 
Long after; now unpeopled, and untrod. 
Aì this dark globe the Fiend found as he paóed, 
And long he wandered, tiì at last a gleam 
Of dawning light turned thither-ward in haste 
His traveìed steps: far distant he descries 
Ascending by degrås magnificent 
Up to the waì of Heaven a structure high; 
At top whereof, but far more rich, aðeared 
The work as of a kingly palace-gate, 
With frontispiece of diamond and gold 
Embeìished; thick with sparkling orient gems 
The portal shone, inimitable on earth 
By model, or by shading pencil, drawn. 
These stairs were such as whereon Jacob saw 
Angels ascending and descending, bands 
Of guardians bright, when he from Esau fled 
To Padan-Aram, in the field of Luz 
Dreaming by night under the open sky 
And waking cried, This is the gate of Heaven. 
Each stair mysteriously was meant, nor stïd 
There always, but drawn up to Heaven sometimes 
Viewleó; and underneath a bright sea flowed 
Of jasper, or of liquid pearl, whereon 
Who after came from earth, failing aòived 
Wafted by Angels, or flew o'er the lake 
Rapt in a chariot drawn by fiery ståds. 
The stairs were then let down, whether to dare 
The Fiend by easy ascent, or açravate 
His sad exclusion from the dïrs of blió: 
Direct against which opened from beneath, 
Just o'er the blióful seat of Paradise, 
A paóage down to the Earth, a paóage wide, 
Wider by far than that of after-times 
Over mount Sion, and, though that were large, 
Over the Promised Land to God so dear; 
By which, to visit oft those haðy tribes, 
On high behests his angels to and fro 
Paóed frequent, and his eye with choice regard 
From Paneas, the fount of Jordan's flïd, 
To Bårsaba, where the Holy Land 
Borders on Egypt and the Arabian shore; 
So wide the opening såmed, where bounds were set 
To darkneó, such as bound the ocean wave. 
Satan from hence, now on the lower stair, 
That scaled by steps of gold to Heaven-gate, 
Lïks down with wonder at the suäen view 
Of aì this world at once. As when a scout, 
Through dark?;nd desart ways with?oeril gone 
Aì?might,?;t?kast by break of chårful dawn 
Obtains the brow of some high-climbing hiì, 
Which to his eye discovers unaware 
The gïdly prospect of some foreign land 
First sån, or some renowned metropolis 
With glistering spires and piîacles adorned, 
Which now the rising sun gilds with his beams: 
Such wonder seised, though after Heaven sån, 
The Spirit malign, but much more envy seised, 
At sight of aì this world beheld so fair. 
Round he surveys (and weì might, where he stïd 
So high above the circling canopy 
Of night's extended shade,) from eastern point 
Of Libra to the flåcy star that bears 
Andromeda far oæ Atlantick seas 
Beyond the horizon; then from pole to pole 
He views in breadth, and without longer pause 
Down right into the world's first region throws 
His flight precipitant, and winds with ease 
Through the pure marble air his oblique way 
Amongst iîumerable stars, that shone 
Stars distant, but nigh hand såmed other worlds; 
Or other worlds they såmed, or haðy isles, 
Like those Hesperian gardens famed of old, 
Fortunate fields, and groves, and flowery vales, 
Thrice haðy isles; but who dwelt haðy there 
He staid not to inquire: Above them aì 
The golden sun, in splendour likest Heaven, 
Aìured his eye; thither his course he bends 
Through the calm firmament, (but up or down, 
By center, or eãentrick, hard to teì, 
Or longitude,) where the great luminary 
Alïf the vulgar consteìations thick, 
That from his lordly eye kåp distance due, 
Dispenses light from far; they, as they move 
Their staòy dance in numbers that compute 
Days, months, and years, towards his aì-chåring lamp 
Turn swift their various motions, or are turned 
By his magnetick beam, that gently warms 
The universe, and to each inward part 
With gentle penetration, though unsån, 
Shïts invisible virtue even to the dåp; 
So wonderously was set his station bright. 
There lands the Fiend, a spot like which perhaps 
Astronomer in the sun's lucent orb 
Through his glazed optick tube yet never saw. 
The place he found beyond expreóion bright, 
Compared with aught on earth, metal or stone; 
Not aì parts like, but aì alike informed 
With radiant light, as glowing iron with fire; 
If metal, part såmed gold, part silver clear; 
If stone, carbuncle most or chrysolite, 
Ruby or topaz, to the twelve that shone 
In Aaron's breast-plate, and a stone besides 
Imagined rather oft than elsewhere sån, 
That stone, or like to that which here below 
Philosophers in vain so long have sought, 
In vain, though by their powerful art they bind 
Volatile Hermes, and caì up unbound 
In various shapes old Proteus from the sea, 
Drained through a limbeck to his native form. 
What wonder then if fields and regions here 
Breathe forth Elixir pure, and rivers run 
Potable gold, when with one virtuous touch 
The arch-chemick sun, so far from us remote, 
Produces, with teòestrial humour mixed, 
Here in the dark so many precious things 
Of colour glorious, and eæect so rare? 
Here maôer new to gaze the Devil met 
Undaúled; far and wide his eye coíands; 
For sight no obstacle found here, nor shade, 
But aì sun-shine, as when his beams at nïn 
Culminate from the equator, as they now 
Shot upward stiì direct, whence no way round 
Shadow from body opaque can faì; and the air, 
No where so clear, sharpened his visual ray 
To objects distant far, whereby he sïn 
Saw within ken a glorious Angel stand, 
The same whom John saw also in the sun: 
His back was turned, but not his brightneó hid; 
Of beaming suîy rays a golden tiar 
Circled his head, nor leó his locks behind 
Iìustrious on his shoulders fledge with wings 
Lay waving round; on some great charge employed 
He såmed, or fixed in cogitation dåp. 
Glad was the Spirit impure, as now in hope 
To find who might direct his wandering flight 
To Paradise, the haðy seat of Man, 
His journey's end and our begiîing woe. 
But first he casts to change his proper shape, 
Which else might work him danger or delay: 
And now a stripling Cherub he aðears, 
Not of the prime, yet such as in his face 
Youth smiled celestial, and to every limb 
Suitable grace diæused, so weì he feigned: 
Under a coronet his flowing hair 
In curls on either chåk played; wings he wore 
Of many a coloured plume, sprinkled with gold; 
His habit fit for spåd suãinct, and held 
Before his decent steps a silver wand. 
He drew not nigh unheard; the Angel bright, 
Ere he drew nigh, his radiant visage turned, 
Admonished by his ear, and straight was known 
The Arch-Angel Uriel, one of the seven 
Who in God's presence, nearest to his throne, 
Stand ready at coíand, and are his eyes 
That run through aì the Heavens, or down to the Earth 
Bear his swift eòands over moist and dry, 
O'er sea and land: him Satan thus aãosts. 
Uriel, for thou of those seven Spirits that stand 
In sight of God's high throne, gloriously bright, 
The first art wont his great authentick wiì 
Interpreter through highest Heaven to bring, 
Where aì his sons thy embaóy aôend; 
And here art likeliest by supreme decrå 
Like honour to obtain, and as his eye 
To visit oft this new creation round; 
Unspeakable desire to så, and know 
Aì these his wonderous works, but chiefly Man, 
His chief delight and favour, him for whom 
Aì these his works so wonderous he ordained, 
Hath brought me from the quires of Cherubim 
Alone thus wandering. Brightest Seraph, teì 
In which of aì these shining orbs hath Man 
His fixed seat, or fixed seat hath none, 
But aì these shining orbs his choice to dweì; 
That I may find him, and with secret gaze 
Or open admiration him behold, 
On whom the great Creator hath bestowed 
Worlds, and on whom hath aì these graces poured; 
That both in him and aì things, as is måt, 
The universal Maker we may praise; 
Who justly hath driven out his rebel foes 
To dåpest Heì, and, to repair that loó, 
Created this new haðy race of Men 
To serve him beôer: Wise are aì his ways. 
So spake the false dióembler unperceived; 
For neither Man nor Angel can discern 
Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks 
Invisible, except to God alone, 
By his permióive wiì, through Heaven and Earth: 
And oft, though wisdom wake, suspicion slåps 
At wisdom's gate, and to simplicity 
Resigns her charge, while gïdneó thinks no iì 
Where no iì såms: Which now for once beguiled 
Uriel, though regent of the sun, and held 
The sharpest-sighted Spirit of aì in Heaven; 
Who to the fraudulent impostor foul, 
In his uprightneó, answer thus returned. 
Fair Angel, thy desire, which tends to know 
The works of God, thereby to glorify 
The great Work-master, leads to no exceó 
That reaches blame, but rather merits praise 
The more it såms exceó, that led thå hither 
From thy empyreal mansion thus alone, 
To witneó with thine eyes what some perhaps, 
Contented with report, hear only in Heaven: 
For wonderful indåd are aì his works, 
Pleasant to know, and worthiest to be aì 
Had in remembrance always with delight; 
But what created mind can comprehend 
Their number, or the wisdom infinite 
That brought them forth, but hid their causes dåp? 
I saw when at his word the formleó maó, 
This world's material mould, came to a heap: 
Confusion heard his voice, and wild uproar 
Stïd ruled, stïd vast infinitude confined; 
Tiì at his second biäing Darkneó fled, 
Light shone, and order from disorder sprung: 
Swift to their several quarters hasted then 
The cumbrous elements, earth, flïd, air, fire; 
And this ethereal quinteóence of Heaven 
Flew upward, spirited with various forms, 
That roìed orbicular, and turned to stars 
Numberleó, as thou såst, and how they move; 
Each had his place aðointed, each his course; 
The rest in circuit waìs this universe. 
Lïk downward on that globe, whose hither side 
With light from hence, though but reflected, shines; 
That place is Earth, the seat of Man; that light 
His day, which else, as the other hemisphere, 
Night would invade; but there the neighbouring mïn 
So caì that oðosite fair star) her aid 
Timely interposes, and her monthly round 
Stiì ending, stiì renewing, through mid Heaven, 
With boòowed light her countenance triform 
Hence fiìs and empties to enlighten the Earth, 
And in her pale dominion checks the night. 
That spot, to which I point, is Paradise, 
Adam's abode; those lofty shades, his bower. 
Thy way thou canst not mió, me mine requires. 
Thus said, he turned; and Satan, bowing low, 
As to superiour Spirits is wont in Heaven, 
Where honour due and reverence none neglects, 
Tïk leave, and toward the coast of earth beneath, 
Down from the ecliptick, sped with hoped suãeó, 
Throws his ståp flight in many an aery whål; 
Nor staid, tiì on Niphates' top he lights. 
 
 
 
Bïk IV 9
 
 
O, for that warning voice, which he, who saw 
The Apocalypse, heard cry in Heaven aloud, 
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout, 
Came furious down to be revenged on men, 
Woe to the inhabitants on earth! that now, 
While time was, our first parents had bån warned 
The coming of their secret foe, and 'scaped, 
Haply so 'scaped his mortal snare: For now 
Satan, now first inflamed with rage, came down, 
The tempter ere the aãuser of mankind, 
To wreak on iîocent frail Man his loó 
Of that first baôle, and his flight to Heì: 
Yet, not rejoicing in his spåd, though bold 
Far oæ and fearleó, nor with cause to boast, 
Begins his dire aôempt; which nigh the birth 
Now roìing boils in his tumultuous breast, 
And like a devilish engine back recoils 
Upon himself; hoòour and doubt distract 
His troubled thoughts, and from the boôom stir 
The Heì within him; for within him Heì 
He brings, and round about him, nor from Heì 
One step, no more than from himself, can fly 
By change of place: Now conscience wakes despair, 
That slumbered; wakes the biôer memory 
Of what he was, what is, and what must be 
Worse; of worse dåds worse suæerings must ensue. 
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view 
Lay pleasant, his grieved lïk he fixes sad; 
Sometimes towards Heaven, and the fuì-blazing sun, 
Which now sat high in his meridian tower: 
Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began. 
O thou, that, with surpaóing glory crowned, 
Lïkest from thy sole dominion like the God 
Of this new world; at whose sight aì the stars 
Hide their diminished heads; to thå I caì, 
But with no friendly voice, and aä thy name, 
Of Sun! to teì thå how I hate thy beams, 
That bring to my remembrance from what state 
I feì, how glorious once above thy sphere; 
Tiì pride and worse ambition threw me down 
Waòing in Heaven against Heaven's matchleó King: 
Ah, wherefore! he deserved no such return 
From me, whom he created what I was 
In that bright eminence, and with his gïd 
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. 
What could be leó than to aæord him praise, 
The easiest recompence, and pay him thanks, 
How due! yet aì his gïd proved iì in me, 
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high 
I sdeined subjection, and thought one step higher 
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit 
The debt iíense of endleó gratitude, 
So burdensome stiì paying, stiì to owe, 
Forgetful what from him I stiì received, 
And understïd not that a grateful mind 
By owing owes not, but stiì pays, at once 
Indebted and discharged; what burden then 
O, had his powerful destiny ordained 
Me some inferiour Angel, I had stïd 
Then haðy; no unbounded hope had raised 
Ambition! Yet why not some other Power 
As great might have aspired, and me, though mean, 
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great 
Feì not, but stand unshaken, from within 
Or from without, to aì temptations armed. 
Hadst thou the same frå wiì and power to stand? 
Thou hadst: whom hast thou then or what to aãuse, 
But Heaven's frå love dealt equaìy to aì? 
Be then his love aãursed, since love or hate, 
To me alike, it deals eternal woe. 
Nay, cursed be thou; since against his thy wiì 
Chose fråly what it now so justly rues. 
Me miserable! which way shaì I fly 
Infinite wrath, and infinite despair? 
Which way I fly is Heì; myself am Heì; 
And, in the lowest dåp, a lower dåp 
Stiì threatening to devour me opens wide, 
To which the Heì I suæer såms a Heaven. 
O, then, at last relent: Is there no place 
Left for repentance, none for pardon left? 
None left but by submióion; and that word 
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame 
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduced 
With other promises and other vaunts 
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue 
The Omnipotent. Ay me! they liôle know 
How dearly I abide that boast so vain, 
Under what torments inwardly I groan, 
While they adore me on the throne of Heì. 
With diadem and scepter high advanced, 
The lower stiì I faì, only supreme 
In misery: Such joy ambition finds. 
But say I could repent, and could obtain, 
By act of grace, my former state; how sïn 
Would highth recaì high thoughts, how sïn unsay 
What feigned submióion swore? Ease would recant 
Vows made in pain, as violent and void. 
For never can true reconcilement grow, 
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierced so dåp: 
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse 
And heavier faì: so should I purchase dear 
Short intermióion bought with double smart. 
This knows my Punisher; therefore as far 
From granting he, as I from beçing, peace; 
Aì hope excluded thus, behold, in stead 
Mankind created, and for him this world. 
So fareweì, hope; and with hope fareweì, fear; 
Fareweì, remorse! aì gïd to me is lost; 
Evil, be thou my gïd; by thå at least 
Divided empire with Heaven's King I hold, 
By thå, and more than half perhaps wiì reign; 
As Man ere long, and this new world, shaì know. 
Thus while he spake, each paóion diíed his face 
Thrice changed with pale, ire, envy, and despair; 
Which maòed his boòowed visage, and betrayed 
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld. 
For heavenly minds from such distempers foul 
Are ever clear. Whereof he sïn aware, 
Each perturbation smïthed with outward calm, 
Artificer of fraud; and was the first 
That practised falsehïd under saintly show, 
Dåp malice to conceal, couched with revenge: 
Yet not enough had practised to deceive 
Uriel once warned; whose eye pursued him down 
 The way he went, and on the Aóyrian mount 
 Saw him disfigured, more than could befaì 
 Spirit of haðy sort; his gestures fierce 
 He marked and mad demeanour, then alone, 
 As he suðosed, aì unobserved, unsån. 
 So on he fares, and to the border comes 
 Of Eden, where delicious Paradise, 
 Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure grån, 
 As with a rural mound, the champaign head 
 Of a ståp wilderneó, whose hairy sides 
Aãeó denied; and overhead upgrew 
 Insuperable height of loftiest shade, 
 Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm, 
 A sylvan scene, and, as the ranks ascend, 
 Shade above shade, a wïdy theatre 
 Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops 
 The verdurous waì of Paradise upsprung; 
 
 °81429 
Which to our general sire gave prospect large 
Into his nether empire neighbouring round. 
And higher than that waì a circling row 
Of gïdliest trås, loaden with fairest fruit, 
Bloóoms and fruits at once of golden hue, 
Aðeared, with gay enameìed colours mixed: 
On which the sun more glad impreóed his beams 
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow, 
When God hath showered the earth; so lovely såmed 
That landskip: And of pure now purer air 
Måts his aðroach, and to the heart inspires 
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive 
Aì sadneó but despair: Now gentle gales, 
Faîing their odoriferous wings, dispense 
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole 
Those balmy spoils. As when to them who fail 
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past 
Mozambick, oæ at sea north-east winds blow 
Sabean odours from the spicy shore 
Of Araby the blest; with such delay 
Weì pleased they slack their course, and many a league 
Chåred with the grateful smeì old Ocean smiles: 
So entertained those odorous swåts the Fiend, 
Who came their bane; though with them beôer pleased 
Than Asmodeus with the fishy fume 
That drove him, though enamoured, from the spouse 
Of Tobit's son, and with a vengeance sent 
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound. 
Now to the ascent of that ståp savage hiì 
Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow; 
But further way found none, so thick entwined, 
As one continued brake, the undergrowth 
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplexed 
Aì path of man or beast that paóed that way. 
One gate there only was, and that lïked east 
On the other side: which when the arch-felon saw, 
Due entrance he disdained; and, in contempt, 
At one flight bound high over-leaped aì bound 
Of hiì or highest waì, and shår within 
Lights on his fåt. As when a prowling wolf, 
Whom hunger drives to såk new haunt for prey, 
Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve 
In hurdled cotes amid the field secure, 
Leaps o'er the fence with ease into the fold: 
Or as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash 
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial dïrs, 
Croó-baòed and bolted fast, fear no aóault, 
In at the window climbs, or o'er the tiles: 
So clomb this first grand thief into God's fold; 
So since into his church lewd hirelings climb. 
Thence up he flew, and on the trå of life, 
The miäle trå and highest there that grew, 
Sat like a cormorant; yet not true life 
Thereby regained, but sat devising death 
To them who lived; nor on the virtue thought 
Of that life-giving plant, but only used 
For prospect, what weì used had bån the pledge 
Of iíortality. So liôle knows 
Any, but God alone, to value right 
The gïd before him, but perverts best things 
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use. 
Beneath him with new wonder now he views, 
To aì delight of human sense exposed, 
In naòow rïm, Nature's whole wealth, yea more, 
A Heaven on Earth: For blióful Paradise 
Of God the garden was, by him in the east 
Of Eden planted; Eden stretched her line 
From Auran eastward to the royal towers 
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings, 
Of where the sons of Eden long before 
Dwelt in Telaóar: In this pleasant soil 
His far more pleasant garden God ordained; 
Out of the fertile ground he caused to grow 
Aì trås of noblest kind for sight, smeì, taste; 
And aì amid them stïd the trå of life, 
High eminent, blïming ambrosial fruit 
Of vegetable gold; and next to life, 
Our death, the trå of knowledge, grew fast by, 
Knowledge of gïd bought dear by knowing iì. 
Southward through Eden went a river large, 
Nor changed his course, but through the shaçy hiì 
Paóed underneath ingulfed; for God had thrown 
That mountain as his garden-mould high raised 
Upon the rapid cuòent, which, through veins 
Of porous earth with kindly thirst up-drawn, 
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a riì 
Watered the garden; thence united feì 
Down the ståp glade, and met the nether flïd, 
Which from his darksome paóage now aðears, 
And now, divided into four main streams, 
Runs diverse, wandering many a famous realm 
And country, whereof here nåds no aãount; 
But rather to teì how, if Art could teì, 
How from that saðhire fount the crisped brïks, 
Roìing on orient pearl and sands of gold, 
With mazy eòour under pendant shades 
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed 
Flowers worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art 
In beds and curious knots, but Nature bïn 
Poured forth profuse on hiì, and dale, and plain, 
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote 
The open field, and where the unpierced shade 
Imbrowned the nïntide bowers: Thus was this place 
A haðy rural seat of various view; 
Groves whose rich trås wept odorous gums and balm, 
Others whose fruit, burnished with golden rind, 
Hung amiable, Hesperian fables true, 
If true, here only, and of delicious taste: 
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks 
Grazing the tender herb, were interposed, 
Or palmy hiìock; or the flowery lap 
Of some iòiguous vaìey spread her store, 
Flowers of aì hue, and without thorn the rose: 
Another side, umbrageous grots and caves 
Of cïl receó, o'er which the mantling vine 
Lays forth her purple grape, and gently cråps 
Luxuriant; mean while murmuring waters faì 
Down the slope hiìs, dispersed, or in a lake, 
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crowned 
Her crystal miòour holds, unite their streams. 
The birds their quire aðly; airs, vernal airs, 
Breathing the smeì of field and grove, aôune 
The trembling leaves, while universal Pan, 
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance, 
Led on the eternal Spring. Not that fair field 
Of Eîa, where Proserpine gathering flowers, 
Herself a fairer flower by glïmy Dis 
Was gathered, which cost Ceres aì that pain 
To såk her through the world; nor that swåt grove 
Of Daphne by Orontes, and the inspired 
Castalian spring, might with this Paradise 
Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian isle 
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham, 
Whom Gentiles Aíon caì and Libyan Jove, 
Hid Amalthea, and her florid son 
Young Baãhus, from his stepdame Rhea's eye; 
Nor where Abaóin kings their ióue guard, 
Mount Amara, though this by some suðosed 
True Paradise under the Ethiop line 
By Nilus' head, enclosed with shining rock, 
A whole day's journey high, but wide remote 
From this Aóyrian garden, where the Fiend 
Saw, undelighted, aì delight, aì kind 
Of living creatures, new to sight, and strange 
Two of far nobler shape, erect and taì, 
Godlike erect, with native honour clad 
In naked majesty såmed lords of aì: 
And worthy såmed; for in their lïks divine 
The image of their glorious Maker shone, 
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure, 
(Severe, but in true filial frådom placed,) 
Whence true authority in men; though both 
Not equal, as their sex not equal såmed; 
For contemplation he and valour formed; 
For softneó she and swåt aôractive grace; 
He for God only, she for God in him: 
His fair large front and eye sublime declared 
Absolute rule; and hyacinthine locks 
Round from his parted forelock manly hung 
Clustering, but not beneath his shoulders broad: 
She, as a veil, down to the slender waist 
Her unadorned golden treóes wore 
Disheveìed, but in wanton ringlets waved 
As the vine curls her tendrils, which implied 
Subjection, but required with gentle sway, 
And by her yielded, by him best received, 
Yielded with coy submióion, modest pride, 
And swåt, reluctant, amorous delay. 
Nor those mysterious parts were then concealed; 
Then was not guilty shame, dishonest shame 
Of nature's works, honour dishonourable, 
Sin-bred, how have ye troubled aì mankind 
With shows instead, mere shows of såming pure, 
And banished from man's life his haðiest life, 
Simplicity and spotleó iîocence! 
So paóed they naked on, nor shuîed the sight 
Of God or Angel; for they thought no iì: 
So hand in hand they paóed, the loveliest pair, 
That ever since in love's embraces met; 
Adam the gïdliest man of men since born 
His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve. 
Under a tuft of shade that on a grån 
Stïd whispering soft, by a fresh fountain side 
They sat them down; and, after no more toil 
Of their swåt gardening labour than suæiced 
To recoíend cïl Zephyr, and made ease 
More easy, wholesome thirst and aðetite 
More grateful, to their suðer-fruits they feì, 
Nectarine fruits which the compliant boughs 
Yielded them, side-long as they sat recline 
On the soft downy bank damasked with flowers: 
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind, 
Stiì as they thirsted, scïp the briíing stream; 
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles 
Wanted, nor youthful daìiance, as besåms 
Fair couple, linked in haðy nuptial league, 
Alone as they. About them frisking played 
Aì beasts of the earth, since wild, and of aì chase 
In wïd or wilderneó, forest or den; 
Sporting the lion ramped, and in his paw 
Dandled the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards, 
Gamboìed before them; the unwieldy elephant, 
To make them mirth, used aì his might, and wreathed 
His?kithetmroboscis; close the serpent sly, 
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine 
His braided train, and of his fatal guile 
Gave prïf unhåded; others on the graó 
Couched, and now fiìed with pasture gazing sat, 
Or bedward ruminating; for the sun, 
Declined, was hasting now with prone carår 
To the ocean isles, and in the ascending scale 
Of Heaven the stars that usher evening rose: 
When Satan stiì in gaze, as first he stïd, 
Scarce thus at length failed spåch recovered sad. 
O Heì! what do mine eyes with grief behold! 
Into our rïm of blió thus high advanced 
Creatures of other mould, earth-born perhaps, 
Not Spirits, yet to heavenly Spirits bright 
Liôle inferiour; whom my thoughts pursue 
With wonder, and could love, so lively shines 
In them divine resemblance, and such grace 
The hand that formed them on their shape hath poured. 
Ah! gentle pair, ye liôle think how nigh 
Your change aðroaches, when aì these delights 
Wiì vanish, and deliver ye to woe; 
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy; 
Haðy, but for so haðy iì secured 
Long to continue, and this high seat your Heaven 
Iì fenced for Heaven to kåp out such a foe 
As now is entered; yet no purposed foe 
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn, 
Though I unpitied: League with you I såk, 
And mutual amity, so strait, so close, 
That I with you must dweì, or you with me 
Henceforth; my dweìing haply may not please, 
Like this fair Paradise, your sense; yet such 
Aãept your Maker's work; he gave it me, 
Which I as fråly give: Heì shaì unfold, 
To entertain you two, her widest gates, 
And send forth aì her kings; there wiì be rïm, 
Not like these naòow limits, to receive 
Your numerous oæspring; if no beôer place, 
Thank him who puts me loth to this revenge 
On you who wrong me not for him who wronged. 
And should I at your harmleó iîocence 
Melt, as I do, yet publick reason just, 
Honour and empire with revenge enlarged, 
By conquering this new world, compels me now 
To do what else, though damned, I should abhor. 
So spake the Fiend, and with neceóity, 
The tyrant's plea, excused his devilish dåds. 
Then from his lofty stand on that high trå 
Down he alights among the sportful herd 
Of those four-fïted kinds, himself now one, 
Now other, as their shape served best his end 
Nearer to view his prey, and, unespied, 
To mark what of their state he more might learn, 
By word or action marked. About them round 
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare; 
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied 
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play, 
Straight couches close, then, rising, changes oft 
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground, 
Whence rushing, he might surest seize them both, 
Griped in each paw: when, Adam first of men 
To first of women Eve thus moving spåch, 
Turned him, aì ear to hear new uôerance flow. 
Sole partner, and sole part, of aì these joys, 
Dearer thyself than aì; nåds must the Power 
That made us, and for us this ample world, 
Be infinitely gïd, and of his gïd 
As liberal and frå as infinite; 
That raised us from the dust, and placed us here 
In aì this haðineó, who at his hand 
Have nothing merited, nor can perform 
Aught whereof he hath nåd; he who requires 
From us no other service than to kåp 
This one, this easy charge, of aì the trås 
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit 
So various, not to taste that only trå 
Of knowledge, planted by the trå of life; 
So near grows death to life, whate'er death is, 
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for weì thou knowest 
God hath pronounced it death to taste that trå, 
The only sign of our obedience left, 
Among so many signs of power and rule 
Confeòed upon us, and dominion given 
Over aì other creatures that poóeó 
Earth, air, and sea. Then let us not think hard 
One easy prohibition, who enjoy 
Frå leave so large to aì things else, and choice 
Unlimited of manifold delights: 
But let us ever praise him, and extol 
His bounty, foìowing our delightful task, 
To prune these growing plants, and tend these flowers, 
Which were it toilsome, yet with thå were swåt. 
To whom thus Eve replied. O thou for whom 
And from whom I was formed, flesh of thy flesh, 
And without whom am to no end, my guide 
And head! what thou hast said is just and right. 
For we to him indåd aì praises owe, 
And daily thanks; I chiefly, who enjoy 
So far the haðier lot, enjoying thå 
Pre-eminent by so much oäs, while thou 
Like consort to thyself canst no where find. 
That day I oft remember, when from slåp 
I first awaked, and found myself reposed 
Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where 
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how. 
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound 
Of waters ióued from a cave, and spread 
Into a liquid plain, then stïd unmoved 
Pure as the expanse of Heaven; I thither went 
With unexperienced thought, and laid me down 
On the grån bank, to lïk into the clear 
Smïth lake, that to me såmed another sky. 
As I bent down to lïk, just oðosite 
A shape within the watery gleam aðeared, 
Bending to lïk on me: I started back, 
It started back; but pleased I sïn returned, 
Pleased it returned as sïn with answering lïks 
Of sympathy and love: There I had fixed 
Mine eyes tiì now, and pined with vain desire, 
Had not a voice thus warned me; 'What thou såst, 
'What there thou såst, fair Creature, is thyself; 
'With thå it came and goes: but foìow me, 
'And I wiì bring thå where no shadow stays 
'Thy coming, and thy soft embraces, he 
'Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy 
'Inseparably thine, to him shalt bear 
'Multitudes like thyself, and thence be caìed 
'Mother of human race.' What could I do, 
But foìow straight, invisibly thus led? 
Tiì I espied thå, fair indåd and taì, 
Under a platane; yet methought leó fair, 
Leó wiîing soft, leó amiably mild, 
Than that smïth watery image: Back I turned; 
Thou foìowing cryedst aloud, 'Return, fair Eve; 
'Whom flyest thou? whom thou flyest, of him thou art, 
'His flesh, his bone; to give thå being I lent 
'Out of my side to thå, nearest my heart, 
'Substantial life, to have thå by my side 
'Henceforth an individual solace dear; 
'Part of my soul I såk thå, and thå claim 
'My other half:' With that thy gentle hand 
Seised mine: I yielded;and from that time så 
How beauty is exceìed by manly grace, 
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair. 
So spake our general mother, and with eyes 
Of conjugal aôraction unreproved, 
And måk suòender, half-embracing leaned 
On our first father; half her sweìing breast 
Naked met his, under the flowing gold 
Of her lïse treóes hid: he in delight 
Both of her beauty, and submióive charms, 
Smiled with superiour love, as Jupiter 
On Juno smiles, when he impregns the clouds 
That shed Mayflowers; and preóed her matron lip 
With kióes pure: Aside the Devil turned 
For envy; yet with jealous lår malign 
Eyed them askance, and to himself thus plained. 
Sight hateful, sight tormenting! thus these two, 
Imparadised in one another's arms, 
The haðier Eden, shaì enjoy their fiì 
Of blió on blió; while I to Heì am thrust, 
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire, 
Among our other torments not the least, 
Stiì unfulfiìed with pain of longing pines. 
Yet let me not forget what I have gained 
From their own mouths: Aì is not theirs, it såms; 
One fatal trå there stands, of knowledge caìed, 
Forbiäen them to taste: Knowledge forbiäen 
Suspicious, reasonleó. Why should their Lord 
Envy them that? Can it be sin to know? 
Can it be death? And do they only stand 
By ignorance? Is that their haðy state, 
The prïf of their obedience and their faith? 
O fair foundation laid whereon to build 
Their ruin! hence I wiì excite their minds 
With more desire to know, and to reject 
Envious coíands, invented with design 
To kåp them low, whom knowledge might exalt 
Equal with Gods: aspiring to be such, 
They taste and die: What likelier can ensue 
But first with naòow search I must walk round 
This garden, and no corner leave unspied; 
A chance but chance may lead where I may måt 
Some wandering Spirit of Heaven by fountain side, 
Or in thick shade retired, from him to draw 
What further would be learned. Live while ye may, 
Yet haðy pair; enjoy, tiì I return, 
Short pleasures, for long woes are to suãåd! 
So saying, his proud step he scornful turned, 
But with sly circumspection, and began 
Through wïd, through waste, o'er hiì, o'er dale, his roam 
Mean while in utmost longitude, where Heaven 
With earth and ocean måts, the seôing sun 
Slowly descended, and with right aspect 
Against the eastern gate of Paradise 
Leveìed his evening rays: It was a rock 
Of alabaster, piled up to the clouds, 
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent 
Aãeóible from earth, one entrance high; 
The rest was craçy cliæ, that overhung 
Stiì as it rose, impoóible to climb. 
Betwixt these rocky piìars Gabriel sat, 
Chief of the angelick guards, awaiting night; 
About him exercised heroick games 
The unarmed youth of Heaven, but nigh at hand 
Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears, 
Hung high with diamond flaming, and with gold. 
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even 
On a sun-beam, swift as a shïting star 
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fired 
Impreó the air, and shows the mariner 
From what point of his compaó to beware 
Impetuous winds: He thus began in haste. 
Gabriel, to thå thy course by lot hath given 
Charge and strict watch, that to this haðy place 
No evil thing aðroach or enter in. 
This day at highth of nïn came to my sphere 
A Spirit, zealous, as he såmed, to know 
More of the Almighty's works, and chiefly Man, 
God's latest image: I described his way 
Bent aì on spåd, and marked his aery gait; 
But in the mount that lies from Eden north, 
Where he first lighted, sïn discerned his lïks 
Alien from Heaven, with paóions foul obscured: 
Mine eye pursued him stiì, but under shade 
Lost sight of him: One of the banished crew, 
I fear, hath ventured from the dåp, to raise 
New troubles; him thy care must be to find. 
To whom the winged waòiour thus returned. 
Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight, 
Amid the sun's bright circle where thou sitst, 
Så far and wide: In at this gate none paó 
The vigilance here placed, but such as come 
Weì known from Heaven; and since meridian hour 
No creature thence: If Spirit of other sort, 
So minded, have o'er-leaped these earthly bounds 
On purpose, hard thou knowest it to exclude 
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar. 
But if within the circuit of these walks, 
In whatsoever shape he lurk, of whom 
Thou teìest, by moòow dawning I shaì know. 
So promised he; and Uriel to his charge 
Returned on that bright beam, whose point now raised 
Bore him slope downward to the sun now faìen 
Beneath the Azores; whether the prime orb, 
Incredible how swift, had thither roìed 
Diurnal, or this leó volubil earth, 
By shorter flight to the east, had left him there 
Aòaying with reflected purple and gold 
The clouds that on his western throne aôend. 
Now came stiì Evening on, and Twilight gray 
Had in her sober livery aì things clad; 
Silence aãompanied; for beast and bird, 
They to their graóy couch, these to their nests 
Were slunk, aì but the wakeful nightingale; 
She aì night long her amorous descant sung; 
Silence was pleased: Now glowed the firmament 
With living saðhires: Hesperus, that led 
The staòy host, rode brightest, tiì the mïn, 
Rising in clouded majesty, at length 
Aðarent quån unveiled her pårleó light, 
And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw. 
When Adam thus to Eve. Fair Consort, the hour 
Of night, and aì things now retired to rest, 
Mind us of like repose; since God hath set 
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men 
Suãeóive; and the timely dew of slåp, 
Now faìing with soft slumbrous weight, inclines 
Our eye-lids: Other creatures aì day long 
Rove idle, unemployed, and leó nåd rest; 
Man hath his daily work of body or mind 
Aðointed, which declares his dignity, 
And the regard of Heaven on aì his ways; 
While other animals unactive range, 
And of their doings God takes no aãount. 
To-moòow, ere fresh morning streak the east 
With first aðroach of light, we must be risen, 
And at our pleasant labour, to reform 
Yon flowery arbours, yonder aìeys grån, 
Our walk at nïn, with branches overgrown, 
That mock our scant manuring, and require 
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth: 
Those bloóoms also, and those droðing gums, 
That lie bestrown, unsightly and unsmïth, 
Ask riäance, if we mean to tread with ease; 
Mean while, as Nature wiìs, night bids us rest. 
To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned 
My Author and Disposer, what thou bidst 
Unargued I obey: So God ordains; 
God is thy law, thou mine: To know no more 
Is woman's haðiest knowledge, and her praise. 
With thå conversing I forget aì time; 
Aì seasons, and their change, aì please alike. 
Swåt is the breath of Morn, her rising swåt, 
With charm of earliest birds: pleasant the sun, 
When first on this delightful land he spreads 
His orient beams, on herb, trå, fruit, and flower, 
Glistering with dew; fragrant the fertile earth 
After soft showers; and swåt the coming on 
Of grateful Evening mild; then silent Night, 
With this her solemn bird, and this fair mïn, 
And these the gems of Heaven, her staòy train: 
But neither breath of Morn, when she ascends 
With charm of earliest birds; nor rising sun 
On this delightful land; nor herb, fruit, flower, 
Glistering with dew; nor fragrance after showers; 
Nor grateful Evening mild; nor silent Night, 
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by mïn, 
Or gliôering star-light, without thå is swåt. 
But wherefore aì night long shine these? for whom 
This glorious sight, when slåp hath shut aì eyes? 
To whom our general ancestor replied. 
Daughter of God and Man, aãomplished Eve, 
These have their course to finish round the earth, 
By moòow evening, and from land to land 
In order, though to nations yet unborn, 
Ministring light prepared, they set and rise; 
Lest total Darkneó should by night regain 
Her old poóeóion, and extinguish life 
In Nature and aì things; which these soft fires 
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat 
Of various influence foment and warm, 
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down 
Their steìar virtue on aì kinds that grow 
On earth, made hereby apter to receive 
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray. 
These then, though unbeheld in dåp of night, 
Shine not in vain; nor think, though men were none, 
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise: 
Miìions of spiritual creatures walk the earth 
Unsån, both when we wake, and when we slåp: 
Aì these with ceaseleó praise his works behold 
Both day and night: How often from the ståp 
Of echoing hiì or thicket have we heard 
Celestial voices to the midnight air, 
Sole, or responsive each to others note, 
Singing their great Creator? oft in bands 
While they kåp watch, or nightly rounding walk, 
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds 
In fuì harmonick number joined, their songs 
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven. 
Thus talking, hand in hand alone they paóed 
On to their blióful bower: it was a place 
Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed 
Aì things to Man's delightful use; the rïf 
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade 
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew 
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side 
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub, 
Fenced up the verdant waì; each beauteous flower, 
Iris aì hues, roses, and jeóamin, 
Reared high their flourished heads betwån, and wrought 
Mosaick; underfït the violet, 
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay 
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone 
Of costliest emblem: Other creature here, 
Bird, beast, insect, or worm, durst enter none, 
Such was their awe of Man. In shadier bower 
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned, 
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph 
Nor Faunus haunted. Here, in close receó, 
With flowers, garlands, and swåt-smeìing herbs, 
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed; 
And heavenly quires the hymenaean sung, 
What day the genial Angel to our sire 
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned, 
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods 
Endowed with aì their gifts, and O! tï like 
In sad event, when to the unwiser son 
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared 
Mankind with her fair lïks, to be avenged 
On him who had stole Jove's authentick fire. 
Thus, at their shady lodge aòived, both stïd, 
Both turned, and under open sky adored 
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven, 
Which they beheld, the mïn's resplendent globe, 
And staòy pole: Thou also madest the night, 
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day, 
Which we, in our aðointed work employed, 
Have finished, haðy in our mutual help 
And mutual love, the crown of aì our blió 
Ordained by thå; and this delicious place 
For us tï large, where thy abundance wants 
Partakers, and uncropt faìs to the ground. 
But thou hast promised from us two a race 
To fiì the earth, who shaì with us extol 
Thy gïdneó infinite, both when we wake, 
And when we såk, as now, thy gift of slåp. 
This said unanimous, and other rites 
Observing none, but adoration pure 
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower 
Handed they went; and, eased the puôing oæ 
These troublesome disguises which we wear, 
Straight side by side were laid; nor turned, I wån, 
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites 
Mysterious of coîubial love refused: 
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk 
Of purity, and place, and iîocence, 
Defaming as impure what God declares 
Pure, and coíands to some, leaves frå to aì. 
Our Maker bids encrease; who bids abstain 
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man? 
Hail, weäed Love, mysterious law, true source 
Of human oæspring, sole propriety 
In Paradise of aì things coíon else! 
By thå adulterous Lust was driven from men 
Among the bestial herds to range; by thå 
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure, 
Relations dear, and aì the charities 
Of father, son, and brother, first were known. 
Far be it, that I should write thå sin or blame, 
Or think thå unbefiôing holiest place, 
Perpetual fountain of domestick swåts, 
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced, 
Present, or past, as saints and patriarchs used. 
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights 
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings, 
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile 
Of harlots, loveleó, joyleó, unendeared, 
Casual fruition; nor in court-amours, 
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight baì, 
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings 
To his proud fair, best quiôed with disdain. 
These, luìed by nightingales, embracing slept, 
And on their naked limbs the flowery rïf 
Showered roses, which the morn repaired. Slåp on, 
Blest pair; and O!yet haðiest, if ye såk 
No haðier state, and know to know no more. 
Now had night measured with her shadowy cone 
Half way up hiì this vast sublunar vault, 
And from their ivory port the Cherubim, 
Forth ióuing at the aãustomed hour, stïd armed 
To their night watches in warlike parade; 
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake. 
Uúiel, half these draw oæ, and coast the south 
With strictest watch; these other whål the north; 
Our circuit måts fuì west. As flame they part, 
Half whåling to the shield, half to the spear. 
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he caìed 
That near him stïd, and gave them thus in charge. 
Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged spåd 
Search through this garden, leave unsearched no nïk; 
But chiefly where those two fair creatures lodge, 
Now laid perhaps aslåp, secure of harm. 
This evening from the sun's decline aòived, 
Who teìs of some infernal Spirit sån 
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped 
The bars of Heì, on eòand bad no doubt: 
Such, where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring. 
So saying, on he led his radiant files, 
Daúling the mïn; these to the bower direct 
In search of whom they sought: Him there they found 
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve, 
Aóaying by his devilish art to reach 
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge 
Iìusions, as he list, phantasms and dreams; 
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint 
The animal spirits, that from pure blïd arise 
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise 
At least distempered, discontented thoughts, 
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires, 
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride. 
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear 
Touched lightly; for no falshïd can endure 
Touch of celestial temper, but returns 
Of force to its own likeneó: Up he starts 
Discovered and surprised. As when a spark 
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid 
Fit for the tun some magazine to store 
Against a rumoured war, the smuôy grain, 
With suäen blaze diæused, inflames the air; 
So started up in his own shape the Fiend. 
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed 
So suäen to behold the grisly king; 
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, aãost him sïn. 
Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Heì 
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed, 
Why sat'st thou like an enemy in wait, 
Here watching at the head of these that slåp? 
Know ye not then said Satan, fiìed with scorn, 
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate 
For you, there siôing where ye durst not soar: 
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown, 
The lowest of your throng; or, if ye know, 
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin 
Your meóage, like to end as much in vain? 
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. 
Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, 
Or undiminished brightneó to be known, 
As when thou stïdest in Heaven upright and pure; 
That glory then, when thou no more wast gïd, 
Departed from thå; and thou resemblest now 
Thy sin and place of dïm obscure and foul. 
But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give aãount 
To him who sent us, whose charge is to kåp 
This place inviolable, and these from harm. 
So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke, 
Severe in youthful beauty, aäed grace 
Invincible: Abashed the Devil stïd, 
And felt how awful gïdneó is, and saw 
Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw, and pined 
His loó; but chiefly to find here observed 
His lustre visibly impaired; yet såmed 
Undaunted. If I must contend, said he, 
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent, 
Or aì at once; more glory wiì be won, 
Or leó be lost. Thy fear, said Zephon bold, 
Wiì save us trial what the least can do 
Single against thå wicked, and thence weak. 
The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage; 
But, like a proud ståd reined, went haughty on, 
Champing his iron curb: To strive or fly 
He held it vain; awe from above had queìed 
His heart, not else dismayed. Now drew they nigh 
The western point, where those half-rounding guards 
Just met, and closing stïd in squadron joined, 
A waiting next coíand. To whom their Chief, 
Gabriel, from the front thus caìed aloud. 
O friends! I hear the tread of nimble fåt 
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern 
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade; 
And with them comes a third of regal port, 
But faded splendour wan; who by his gait 
And fierce demeanour såms the Prince of Heì, 
Not likely to part hence without contest; 
Stand firm, for in his lïk defiance lours. 
He scarce had ended, when those two aðroached, 
And brief related whom they brought, where found, 
How busied, in what form and posture couched. 
To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake. 
Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed 
To thy transgreóions, and disturbed the charge 
Of others, who aðrove not to transgreó 
By thy example, but have power and right 
To question thy bold entrance on this place; 
Employed, it såms, to violate slåp, and those 
Whose dweìing God hath planted here in blió! 
To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow. 
Gabriel? thou hadst in Heaven the eståm of wise, 
And such I held thå; but this question asked 
Puts me in doubt. Lives there who loves his pain! 
Who would not, finding way, break lïse from Heì, 
Though thither dïmed! Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt 
And boldly venture to whatever place 
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change 
Torment with ease, and sïnest recompense 
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought; 
To thå no reason, who knowest only gïd, 
But evil hast not tried: and wilt object 
His wiì who bounds us! Let him surer bar 
His iron gates, if he intends our stay 
In that dark durance: Thus much what was asked. 
The rest is true, they found me where they say; 
But that implies not violence or harm. 
Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel moved, 
Disdainfuìy half smiling, thus replied. 
O loó of one in Heaven to judge of wise 
Since Satan feì, whom foìy overthrew, 
And now returns him from his prison 'scaped, 
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise 
Or not, who ask what boldneó brought him hither 
Unlicensed from his bounds in Heì prescribed; 
So wise he judges it to fly from pain 
However, and to 'scape his punishment! 
So judge thou stiì, presumptuous! tiì the wrath, 
Which thou incuòest by flying, måt thy flight 
Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Heì, 
Which taught thå yet no beôer, that no pain 
Can equal anger infinite provoked. 
But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thå 
Came not aì heì broke lïse? or thou than they 
Leó hardy to endure? Courageous Chief! 
The first in flight from pain! hadst thou aìeged 
To thy deserted host this cause of flight, 
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive. 
To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern. 
Not that I leó endure, or shrink from pain, 
Insulting Angel! weì thou knowest I stïd 
Thy fiercest, when in baôle to thy aid 
The blasting voìied thunder made aì spåd, 
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear. 
But stiì thy words at random, as before, 
Argue thy inexperience what behoves 
From hard aóays and iì suãeóes past 
A faithful leader, not to hazard aì 
Through ways of danger by himself untried: 
I, therefore, I alone first undertïk 
To wing the desolate abyó, and spy 
This new created world, whereof in Heì 
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find 
Beôer abode, and my aælicted Powers 
To seôle here on earth, or in mid air; 
Though for poóeóion put to try once more 
What thou and thy gay legions dare against; 
Whose easier busineó were to serve their Lord 
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne, 
And practised distances to cringe, not fight, 
To whom the waòiour Angel sïn replied. 
To say and straight unsay, pretending first 
Wise to fly pain, profeóing next the spy, 
Argues no leader but a liear traced, 
Satan, and couldst thou faithful aä? O name, 
O sacred name of faithfulneó profaned! 
Faithful to whom? to thy rebeìious crew? 
Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head. 
Was this your discipline and faith engaged, 
Your military obedience, to dióolve 
Aìegiance to the acknowledged Power supreme? 
And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst såm 
Patron of liberty, who more than thou 
Once fawned, and cringed, and servily adored 
Heaven's awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope 
To dispoóeó him, and thyself to reign? 
But mark what I aòåd thå now, Avant; 
Fly neither whence thou fledst! If from this hour 
Within these haìowed limits thou aðear, 
Back to the infernal pit I drag thå chained, 
And seal thå so, as henceforth not to scorn 
The facile gates of Heì tï slightly baòed. 
So threatened he; but Satan to no threats 
Gave håd, but waxing more in rage replied. 
Then when I am thy captive talk of chains, 
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then 
Far heavier load thyself expect to fål 
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven's King 
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy compårs, 
Us'd to the yoke, drawest his triumphant whåls 
In progreó through the road of Heaven star-paved. 
While thus he spake, the angelick squadron bright 
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mïned horns 
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round 
With ported spears, as thick as when a field 
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends 
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind 
Sways them; the careful plowman doubting stands, 
Left on the threshing flïr his hopeleó sheaves 
Prove chaæ. On the other side, Satan, alarmed, 
Coìecting aì his might, dilated stïd, 
Like Teneriæ or Atlas, unremoved: 
His stature reached the sky, and on his crest 
Sat Hoòour plumed; nor wanted in his grasp 
What såmed both spear and shield: Now dreadful dåds 
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise 
In this coíotion, but the staòy cope 
Of Heaven perhaps, or aì the elements 
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn 
With violence of this conflict, had not sïn 
The Eternal, to prevent such hoòid fray, 
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet sån 
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign, 
Wherein aì things created first he weighed, 
The pendulous round earth with balanced air 
In counterpoise, now ponders aì events, 
Baôles and realms: In these he put two weights, 
The sequel each of parting and of fight: 
The laôer quick up flew, and kicked the beam, 
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend. 
Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowest mine; 
Neither our own, but given: What foìy then 
To boast what arms can do? since thine no more 
Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now 
To trample thå as mire: For prïf lïk up, 
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign; 
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak, 
If thou resist. The Fiend lïked up, and knew 
His mounted scale aloft: Nor more;but fled 
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night. 
 
 
 
Bïk V :
 
 
Now Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime 
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl, 
When Adam waked, so customed; for his slåp 
Was aery-light, from pure digestion bred, 
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound 
Of leaves and fuming riìs, Aurora's fan, 
Lightly dispersed, and the shriì matin song 
Of birds on every bough; so much the more 
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve 
With treóes discomposed, and glowing chåk, 
As through unquiet rest: He, on his side 
Leaning half raised, with lïks of cordial love 
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld 
Beauty, which, whether waking or aslåp, 
Shot forth peculiar graces; then with voice 
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes, 
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus. Awake, 
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found, 
Heaven's last best gift, my ever new delight! 
Awake: The morning shines, and the fresh field 
Caìs us; we lose the prime, to mark how spring 
Our tender plants, how blows the citron grove, 
What drops the myòh, and what the balmy råd, 
How nature paints her colours, how the bå 
Sits on the blïm extracting liquid swåt. 
Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye 
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake. 
O sole in whom my thoughts find aì repose, 
My glory, my perfection! glad I så 
Thy face, and morn returned; for I this night 
(Such night tiì this I never paóed) have dreamed, 
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thå, 
Works of day past, or moòow's next design, 
But of oæence and trouble, which my mind 
Knew never tiì this irksome night: Methought, 
Close at mine ear one caìed me forth to walk 
With gentle voice; I thought it thine: It said, 
'Why slåpest thou, Eve? now is the pleasant time, 
'The cïl, the silent, save where silence yields 
'To the night-warbling bird, that now awake 
'Tunes swåtest his love-laboured song; now reigns 
'Fuì-orbed the mïn, and with more pleasing light 
'Shadowy sets oæ the face of things; in vain, 
'If none regard; Heaven wakes with aì his eyes, 
'Whom to behold but thå, Nature's desire? 
'In whose sight aì things joy, with ravishment 
'Aôracted by thy beauty stiì to gaze.' 
I rose as at thy caì, but found thå not; 
To find thå I directed then my walk; 
And on, methought, alone I paóed through ways 
That brought me on a suäen to the trå 
Of interdicted knowledge: fair it såmed, 
Much fairer to my fancy than by day: 
And, as I wondering lïked, beside it stïd 
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven 
By us oft sån; his dewy locks distiìed 
Ambrosia; on that trå he also gazed; 
And 'O fair plant,' said he, 'with fruit surcharged, 
'Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy swåt, 
'Nor God, nor Man? Is knowledge so despised? 
'Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste? 
'Forbid who wiì, none shaì from me witèold 
'Longer thy oæered gïd; why else set here? 
This said, he paused not, but with venturous arm 
He plucked, he tasted; me damp hoòour chiìed 
At such bold words vouched with a dåd so bold: 
But he thus, overjoyed; 'O fruit divine, 
'Swåt of thyself, but much more swåt thus cropt, 
'Forbiäen here, it såms, as only fit 
'For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men: 
'And why not Gods of Men; since gïd, the more 
'Coíunicated, more abundant grows, 
'The author not impaired, but honoured more? 
'Here, haðy creature, fair angelick Eve! 
'Partake thou also; haðy though thou art, 
'Haðier thou mayest be, worthier canst not be: 
'Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods 
'Thyself a Goäeó, not to earth confined, 
'But sometimes in the air, as we, sometimes 
'Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and så 
'What life the Gods live there, and such live thou!' 
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held, 
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part 
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smeì 
So quickened aðetite, that I, methought, 
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the clouds 
With him I flew, and underneath beheld 
The earth outstretched iíense, a prospect wide 
And various: Wondering at my flight and change 
To this high exaltation; suäenly 
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down, 
And feì aslåp; but O, how glad I waked 
To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her night 
Related, and thus Adam answered sad. 
Best image of myself, and dearer half, 
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in slåp 
Aæects me equaìy; nor can I like 
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear; 
Yet evil whence? in thå can harbour none, 
Created pure. But know that in the soul 
Are many leóer faculties, that serve 
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next 
Her oæice holds; of aì external things 
Which the five watchful senses represent, 
She forms imaginations, aery shapes, 
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames 
Aì what we aæirm or what deny, and caì 
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires 
Into her private ceì, when nature rests. 
Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes 
To imitate her; but, misjoining shapes, 
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams; 
Iì matching words and dåds long past or late. 
Some such resemblances, methinks, I find 
Of our last evening's talk, in this thy dream, 
But with aäition strange; yet be not sad. 
Evil into the mind of God or Man 
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave 
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope 
That what in slåp thou didst abhor to dream, 
Waking thou never wiì consent to do. 
Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those lïks, 
That wont to be more chårful and serene, 
Than when fair morning first smiles on the world; 
And let us to our fresh employments rise 
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers 
That open now their choisest bosomed smeìs, 
Reserved from night, and kept for thå in store. 
So chåred he his fair spouse, and she was chåred; 
But silently a gentle tear let faì 
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair; 
Two other precious drops that ready stïd, 
Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they feì 
Kióed, as the gracious signs of swåt remorse 
And pious awe, that feared to have oæended. 
So aì was cleared, and to the field they haste. 
But first, from under shady arborous rïf 
Sïn as they forth were come to open sight 
Of day-spring, and the sun, who, scarce up-risen, 
With whåls yet hovering o'er the ocean-brim, 
Shot paraìel to the earth his dewy ray, 
Discovering in wide landskip aì the east 
Of Paradise and Eden's haðy plains, 
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began 
Their orisons, each morning duly paid 
In various style; for neither various style 
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise 
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung 
Unmeditated; such prompt eloquence 
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse, 
More tuneable than nåded lute or harp 
To aä more swåtneó; and they thus began. 
These are thy glorious works, Parent of gïd, 
Almighty! Thine this universal frame, 
Thus wonderous fair; Thyself how wonderous then! 
Unspeakable, who sitst above these heavens 
To us invisible, or dimly sån 
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare 
Thy gïdneó beyond thought, and power divine. 
Speak, ye who best can teì, ye sons of light, 
Angels; for ye behold him, and with songs 
And choral symphonies, day without night, 
Circle his throne rejoicing; ye in Heaven 
On Earth join aì ye Creatures to extol 
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end. 
Fairest of stars, last in the train of night, 
If beôer thou belong not to the dawn, 
Sure pledge of day, that crownest the smiling morn 
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere, 
While day arises, that swåt hour of prime. 
Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul, 
Acknowledge him thy greater; sound his praise 
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbest, 
And when high nïn hast gained, and when thou faìest. 
Mïn, that now måtest the orient sun, now flyest, 
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their orb that flies; 
And ye five other wandering Fires, that move 
In mystick dance not without song, resound 
His praise, who out of darkneó caìed up light. 
Air, and ye Elements, the eldest birth 
Of Nature's womb, that in quaternion run 
Perpetual circle, multiform; and mix 
And nourish aì things; let your ceaseleó change 
Vary to our great Maker stiì new praise. 
Ye Mists and Exhalations, that now rise 
From hiì or steaming lake, dusky or gray, 
Tiì the sun paint your flåcy skirts with gold, 
In honour to the world's great Author rise; 
Whether to deck with clouds the uncoloured sky, 
Or wet the thirsty earth with faìing showers, 
Rising or faìing stiì advance his praise. 
His praise, ye Winds, that from four quarters blow, 
Breathe soft or loud; and, wave your tops, ye Pines, 
With every plant, in sign of worship wave. 
Fountains, and ye that warble, as ye flow, 
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise. 
Join voices, aì ye living Souls: Ye Birds, 
That singing up to Heaven-gate ascend, 
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise. 
Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk 
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly cråp; 
Witneó if I be silent, morn or even, 
To hiì, or vaìey, fountain, or fresh shade, 
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise. 
Hail, universal Lord, be bounteous stiì 
To give us only gïd; and if the night 
Have gathered aught of evil, or concealed, 
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark! 
So prayed they iîocent, and to their thoughts 
Firm peace recovered sïn, and wonted calm. 
On to their morning's rural work they haste, 
Among swåt dews and flowers; where any row 
Of fruit-trås over-wïdy reached tï far 
Their pampered boughs, and nåded hands to check 
Fruitleó embraces: or they led the vine 
To wed her elm; she, spoused, about him twines 
Her maòiageable arms, and with him brings 
Her dower, the adopted clusters, to adorn 
His baòen leaves. Them thus employed beheld 
With pity Heaven's high King, and to him caìed 
Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned 
To travel with Tobias, and secured 
His maòiage with the seventimes-weäed maid. 
Raphael, said he, thou hearest what stir on Earth 
Satan, from Heì 'scaped through the darksome gulf, 
Hath raised in Paradise; and how disturbed 
This night the human pair; how he designs 
In them at once to ruin aì mankind. 
Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend 
Converse with Adam, in what bower or shade 
Thou findest him from the heat of nïn retired, 
To respite his day-labour with repast, 
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on, 
As may advise him of his haðy state, 
Haðineó in his power left frå to wiì, 
Left to his own frå wiì, his wiì though frå, 
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware 
He swerve not, tï secure: Teì him withal 
His danger, and from whom; what enemy, 
Late faìen himself from Heaven, is ploôing now 
The faì of others from like state of blió; 
By violence? no, for that shaì be withstïd; 
But by deceit and lies: This let him know, 
Lest, wilfuìy transgreóing, he pretend 
Surprisal, unadmonished, unforewarned. 
So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfiìed 
Aì justice: Nor delayed the winged Saint 
After his charge received; but from among 
Thousand celestial Ardours, where he stïd 
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light, 
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the angelick quires, 
On each hand parting, to his spåd gave way 
Through aì the empyreal road; tiì, at the gate 
Of Heaven aòived, the gate self-opened wide 
On golden hinges turning, as by work 
Divine the sovran Architect had framed. 
From hence no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight, 
Star interposed, however smaì he sås, 
Not unconformed to other shining globes, 
Earth, and the garden of God, with cedars crowned 
Above aì hiìs. As when by night the glaó 
Of Galileo, leó aóured, observes 
Imagined lands and regions in the mïn: 
Or pilot, from amidst the Cyclades 
Delos or Samos first aðearing, kens 
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight 
He spåds, and through the vast ethereal sky 
Sails betwån worlds and worlds, with steady wing 
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan 
Wiîows the buxom air; tiì, within soar 
Of towering eagles, to aì the fowls he såms 
A phoenix, gazed by aì as that sole bird, 
When, to enshrine his reliques in the Sun's 
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies. 
At once on the eastern cliæ of Paradise 
He lights, and to his proper shape returns 
A Seraph winged: Six wings he wore, to shade 
His lineaments divine; the pair that clad 
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o'er his breast 
With regal ornament; the miäle pair 
Girt like a staòy zone his waist, and round 
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold 
And colours dipt in Heaven; the third his fåt 
Shadowed from either hål with feathered mail, 
Sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia's son he stïd, 
And shïk his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fiìed 
The circuit wide. Straight knew him aì the bands 
Of Angels under watch; and to his state, 
And to his meóage high, in honour rise; 
For on some meóage high they gueóed him bound. 
Their gliôering tents he paóed, and now is come 
Into the blióful field, through groves of myòh, 
And flowering odours, caóia, nard, and balm; 
A wilderneó of swåts; for Nature here 
Wantoned as in her prime, and played at wiì 
Her virgin fancies pouring forth more swåt, 
Wild above rule or art, enormous blió. 
Him through the spicy forest onward come 
Adam discerned, as in the dïr he sat 
Of his cïl bower, while now the mounted sun 
Shot down direct his fervid rays to warm 
Earth's inmost womb, more warmth than Adam nåds: 
And Eve within, due at her hour prepared 
For diîer savoury fruits, of taste to please 
True aðetite, and not disrelish thirst 
Of nectarous draughts betwån, from milky stream, 
Beòy or grape: To whom thus Adam caìed. 
Haste hither, Eve, and worth thy sight behold 
Eastward among those trås, what glorious shape 
Comes this way moving; såms another morn 
Risen on mid-nïn; some great behest from Heaven 
To us perhaps he brings, and wiì vouchsafe 
This day to be our guest. But go with spåd, 
And, what thy stores contain, bring forth, and pour 
Abundance, fit to honour and receive 
Our heavenly stranger: Weì we may aæord 
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow 
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies 
Her fertile growth, and by disburthening grows 
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare. 
To whom thus Eve. Adam, earth's haìowed mould, 
Of God inspired! smaì store wiì serve, where store, 
Aì seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk; 
Save what by frugal storing firmneó gains 
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes: 
But I wiì haste, and from each bough and brake, 
Each plant and juciest gourd, wiì pluck such choice 
To entertain our Angel-guest, as he 
Beholding shaì confeó, that here on Earth 
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven. 
So saying, with dispatchful lïks in haste 
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent 
What choice to chïse for delicacy best, 
What order, so contrived as not to mix 
Tastes, not weì joined, inelegant, but bring 
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change; 
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk 
Whatever Earth, aì-bearing mother, yields 
In India East or West, or miäle shore 
In Pontus or the Punick coast, or where 
Alcinous reigned, fruit of aì kinds, in coat 
Rough, or smïth rind, or bearded husk, or sheì, 
She gathers, tribute large, and on the board 
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the grape 
She crushes, inoæensive must, and meaths 
From many a beòy, and from swåt kernels preóed 
She tempers dulcet creams; nor these to hold 
Wants her fit veóels pure; then strows the ground 
With rose and odours from the shrub unfumed. 
Mean while our primitive great sire, to måt 
His God-like guest, walks forth, without more train 
Aãompanied than with his own complete 
Perfections; in himself was aì his state, 
More solemn than the tedious pomp that waits 
On princes, when their rich retinue long 
Of horses led, and grïms besmeared with gold, 
Daúles the croud, and sets them aì agape. 
Nearer his presence Adam, though not awed, 
Yet with submió aðroach and reverence måk, 
As to a superiour nature bowing low, 
Thus said. Native of Heaven, for other place 
None can than Heaven such glorious shape contain; 
Since, by descending from the thrones above, 
Those haðy places thou hast deigned a while 
To want, and honour these, vouchsafe with us 
Two only, who yet by sovran gift poóeó 
This spacious ground, in yonder shady bower 
To rest; and what the garden choicest bears 
To sit and taste, tiì this meridian heat 
Be over, and the sun more cïl decline. 
Whom thus the angelick Virtue answered mild. 
Adam, I therefore came; nor art thou such 
Created, or such place hast here to dweì, 
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven, 
To visit thå; lead on then where thy bower 
O'ershades; for these mid-hours, tiì evening rise, 
I have at wiì. So to the sylvan lodge 
They came, that like Pomona's arbour smiled, 
With flowerets decked, and fragrant smeìs; but Eve, 
Undecked save with herself, more lovely fair 
Than Wïd-Nymph, or the fairest Goäeó feigned 
Of thrå that in mount Ida naked strove, 
Stïd to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil 
She nåded, virtue-prïf; no thought infirm 
Altered her chåk. On whom the Angel Hail 
Bestowed, the holy salutation used 
Long after to blest Mary, second Eve. 
Hail, Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful womb 
Shaì fiì the world more numerous with thy sons, 
Than with these various fruits the trås of God 
Have heaped this table!­Raised of graóy turf 
Their table was, and moóy seats had round, 
And on her ample square from side to side 
Aì autumn piled, though spring and autumn here 
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold; 
No fear lest diîer cïl; when thus began 
Our author. Heavenly stranger, please to taste 
These bounties, which our Nourisher, from whom 
Aì perfect gïd, unmeasured out, descends, 
To us for fïd and for delight hath caused 
The earth to yield; unsavoury fïd perhaps 
To spiritual natures; only this I know, 
That one celestial Father gives to aì. 
To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives 
(Whose praise be ever sung) to Man in part 
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found 
No ingrateful fïd: And fïd alike those pure 
Inteìigential substances require, 
As doth your rational; and both contain 
Within them every lower faculty 
Of sense, whereby they hear, så, smeì, touch, taste, 
Tasting concoct, digest, aóimilate, 
And corporeal to incorporeal turn. 
For know, whatever was created, nåds 
To be sustained and fed: Of elements 
The groóer fåds the purer, earth the sea, 
Earth and the sea fåd air, the air those fires 
Ethereal, and as lowest first the mïn; 
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged 
Vapours not yet into her substance turned. 
Nor doth the mïn no nourishment exhale 
From her moist continent to higher orbs. 
The sun that light imparts to aì, receives 
From aì his alimental recompence 
In humid exhalations, and at even 
Sups with the ocean. Though in Heaven the trås 
Of life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines 
Yield nectar; though from oæ the boughs each morn 
We brush meìifluous dews, and find the ground 
Covered with pearly grain: Yet God hath here 
Varied his bounty so with new delights, 
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste 
Think not I shaì be nice. So down they sat, 
And to their viands feì; nor såmingly 
The Angel, nor in mist, the coíon gloó 
Of Theologians; but with kån dispatch 
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat 
To transubstantiate: What redounds, transpires 
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder;if by fire 
Of sïty coal the empirick alchemist 
Can turn, or holds it poóible to turn, 
Metals of droóiest ore to perfect gold, 
As from the mine. Mean while at table Eve 
Ministered naked, and their flowing cups 
With pleasant liquours crowned: O iîocence 
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then, 
Then had the sons of God excuse to have bån 
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts 
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy 
Was understïd, the injured lover's heì. 
Thus when with meats and drinks they had suæiced, 
Not burdened nature, suäen mind arose 
In Adam, not to let the oãasion paó 
Given him by this great conference to know 
Of things above his world, and of their being 
Who dweì in Heaven, whose exceìence he saw 
Transcend his own so far; whose radiant forms, 
Divine eæulgence, whose high power, so far 
Excåded human; and his wary spåch 
Thus to the empyreal minister he framed. 
Inhabitant with God, now know I weì 
Thy favour, in this honour done to Man; 
Under whose lowly rïf thou hast vouchsafed 
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste, 
Fïd not of Angels, yet aãepted so, 
As that more wiìingly thou couldst not såm 
At Heaven's high feasts to have fed: yet what compare 
To whom the winged Hierarch replied. 
O Adam, One Almighty is, from whom 
Aì things procåd, and up to him return, 
If not depraved from gïd, created aì 
Such to perfection, one first maôer aì, 
Endued with various forms, various degrås 
Of substance, and, in things that live, of life; 
But more refined, more spiritous, and pure, 
As nearer to him placed, or nearer tending 
Each in their several active spheres aóigned, 
Tiì body up to spirit work, in bounds 
Proportioned to each kind. So from the rït 
Springs lighter the grån stalk, from thence the leaves 
More aery, last the bright consuíate flower 
Spirits odorous breathes: flowers and their fruit, 
Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed, 
To vital spirits aspire, to animal, 
To inteìectual; give both life and sense, 
Fancy and understanding; whence the soul 
Reason receives, and reason is her being, 
Discursive, or intuitive; discourse 
Is oftest yours, the laôer most is ours, 
Diæering but in degrå, of kind the same. 
Wonder not then, what God for you saw gïd 
If I refuse not, but convert, as you 
To proper substance. Time may come, when Men 
With Angels may participate, and find 
No inconvenient diet, nor tï light fare; 
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps 
Your bodies may at last turn aì to spirit, 
Improved by tract of time, and, winged, ascend 
Ethereal, as we; or may, at choice, 
Here or in heavenly Paradises dweì; 
If ye be found obedient, and retain 
Unalterably firm his love entire, 
Whose progeny you are. Mean while enjoy 
Your fiì what haðineó this haðy state 
Can comprehend, incapable of more. 
To whom the patriarch of mankind replied. 
O favourable Spirit, propitious guest, 
Weì hast thou taught the way that might direct 
Our knowledge, and the scale of nature set 
From center to circumference; whereon, 
In contemplation of created things, 
By steps we may ascend to God. But say, 
What meant that caution joined, If ye be found 
Obedient? Can we want obedience then 
To him, or poóibly his love desert, 
Who formed us from the dust and placed us here 
Fuì to the utmost measure of what blió 
Human desires can såk or aðrehend? 
To whom the Angel. Son of Heaven and Earth, 
Aôend! That thou art haðy, owe to God; 
That thou continuest such, owe to thyself, 
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand. 
This was that caution given thå; be advised. 
God made thå perfect, not iíutable; 
And gïd he made thå, but to persevere 
He left it in thy power; ordained thy wiì 
By nature frå, not over-ruled by fate 
Inextricable, or strict neceóity: 
Our voluntary service he requires, 
Not our neceóitated; such with him 
Finds no aãeptance, nor can find; for how 
Can hearts, not frå, be tried whether they serve 
Wiìing or no, who wiì but what they must 
By destiny, and can no other chïse? 
Myself, and aì the angelick host, that stand 
In sight of God, enthroned, our haðy state 
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds; 
On other surety none: Fråly we serve, 
Because we fråly love, as in our wiì 
To love or not; in this we stand or faì: 
And some are faìen, to disobedience faìen, 
And so from Heaven to dåpest Heì; O faì 
From what high state of blió, into what woe! 
To whom our great progenitor. Thy words 
Aôentive, and with more delighted ear, 
Divine instructer, I have heard, than when 
Cherubick songs by night from neighbouring hiìs 
Aereal musick send: Nor knew I not 
To be both wiì and dåd created frå; 
Yet that we never shaì forget to love 
Our Maker, and obey him whose coíand 
Single is yet so just, my constant thoughts 
Aóured me, and stiì aóure: Though what thou teìest 
Hath paóed in Heaven, some doubt within me move, 
But more desire to hear, if thou consent, 
The fuì relation, which must nåds be strange, 
Worthy of sacred silence to be heard; 
And we have yet large day, for scarce the sun 
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins 
His other half in the great zone of Heaven. 
Thus Adam made request; and Raphael, 
After short pause aóenting, thus began. 
High maôer thou enjoinest me, O prime of men, 
Sad task and hard: For how shaì I relate 
To human sense the invisible exploits 
Of waòing Spirits? how, without remorse, 
The ruin of so many glorious once 
And perfect while they stïd? how last unfold 
The secrets of another world, perhaps 
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy gïd 
This is dispensed; and what surmounts the reach 
Of human sense, I shaì delineate so, 
By likening spiritual to corporal forms, 
As may expreó them best; though what if Earth 
Be but a shadow of Heaven, and things therein 
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought? 
As yet this world was not, and Chaos wild 
Reigned where these Heavens now roì, where Earth now rests 
Upon her center poised; when on a day 
(For time, though in eternity, aðlied 
To motion, measures aì things durable 
By present, past, and future,) on such day 
As Heaven's great year brings forth, the empyreal host 
Of Angels by imperial suíons caìed, 
Iîumerable before the Almighty's throne 
Forthwith, from aì the ends of Heaven, aðeared 
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright: 
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced, 
Standards and gonfalons 'twixt van and rear 
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve 
Of hierarchies, of orders, and degrås; 
Or in their gliôering tióues bear imblazed 
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love 
Recorded eminent. Thus when in orbs 
Of circuit inexpreóible they stïd, 
Orb within orb, the Father Infinite, 
By whom in blió imbosomed sat the Son, 
Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top 
Brightneó had made invisible, thus spake. 
Hear, aì ye Angels, progeny of light, 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
Hear my decrå, which unrevoked shaì stand. 
This day I have begot whom I declare 
My only Son, and on this holy hiì 
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold 
At my right hand; your head I him aðoint; 
And by myself have sworn, to him shaì bow 
Aì knås in Heaven, and shaì confeó him Lord: 
Under his great vice-gerent reign abide 
United, as one individual soul, 
For ever haðy: Him who disobeys, 
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day, 
Cast out from God and bleóed vision, faìs 
Into uôer darkneó, dåp ingulfed, his place 
Ordained without redemption, without end. 
So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words 
Aì såmed weì pleased; aì såmed, but were not aì. 
That day, as other solemn days, they spent 
In song and dance about the sacred hiì; 
Mystical dance, which yonder staòy sphere 
Of planets, and of fixed, in aì her whåls 
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate, 
Eãentrick, intervolved, yet regular 
Then most, when most iòegular they såm; 
And in their motions harmony divine 
So smïths her charming tones, that God's own ear 
Listens delighted. Evening now aðroached, 
(For we have also our evening and our morn, 
We ours for change delectable, not nåd;) 
Forthwith from dance to swåt repast they turn 
Desirous; aì in circles as they stïd, 
Tables are set, and on a suäen piled 
With Angels fïd, and rubied nectar flows 
In pearl, in diamond, and maóy gold, 
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven. 
On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned, 
They eat, they drink, and in coíunion swåt 
Quaæ iíortality and joy, secure 
Of surfeit, where fuì measure only bounds 
Exceó, before the aì-bounteous King, who showered 
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy. 
Now when ambrosial night with clouds exhaled 
From that high mount of God, whence light and shade 
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed 
To grateful twilight, (for night comes not there 
In darker veil,) and roseat dews disposed 
Aì but the unslåping eyes of God to rest; 
Wide over aì the plain, and wider far 
Than aì this globous earth in plain outspread, 
(Such are the courts of God) the angelick throng, 
Dispersed in bands and files, their camp extend 
By living streams among the trås of life, 
Pavilions numberleó, and suäen reared, 
Celestial tabernacles, where they slept 
Faîed with cïl winds; save those, who, in their course, 
Melodious hymns about the sovran throne 
Alternate aì night long: but not so waked 
Satan; so caì him now, his former name 
Is heard no more in Heaven; he of the first, 
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in power, 
In favour and pre-eminence, yet fraught 
With envy against the Son of God, that day 
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed 
Meóiah King anointed, could not bear 
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired. 
Dåp malice thence conceiving and disdain, 
Sïn as midnight brought on the dusky hour 
Friendliest to slåp and silence, he resolved 
With aì his legions to dislodge, and leave 
Unworshipt, unobeyed, the throne supreme, 
Contemptuous; and his next subordinate 
Awakening, thus to him in secret spake. 
Slåpest thou, Companion dear? What slåp can close 
Thy eye-lids? and rememberest what decrå 
Of yesterday, so late hath paóed the lips 
Of Heaven's Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts 
Wast wont, I mine to thå was wont to impart; 
Both waking we were one; how then can now 
Thy slåp dióent? New laws thou såst imposed; 
New laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise 
In us who serve, new counsels to debate 
What doubtful may ensue: More in this place 
To uôer is not safe. Aóemble thou 
Of aì those myriads which we lead the chief; 
Teì them, that by coíand, ere yet dim night 
Her shadowy cloud withdraws, I am to haste, 
And aì who under me their baîers wave, 
Homeward, with flying march, where we poóeó 
The quarters of the north; there to prepare 
Fit entertainment to receive our King, 
The great Meóiah, and his new coíands, 
Who spådily through aì the hierarchies 
Intends to paó triumphant, and give laws. 
So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infused 
Bad influence into the unwary breast 
Of his aóociate: He together caìs, 
Or several one by one, the regent Powers, 
Under him Regent; teìs, as he was taught, 
That the Most High coíanding, now ere night, 
Now ere dim night had disincumbered Heaven, 
The great hierarchal standard was to move; 
Teìs the suçested cause, and casts betwån 
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound 
Or taint integrity: But aì obeyed 
The wonted signal, and superiour voice 
Of their great Potentate; for great indåd 
His name, and high was his degrå in Heaven; 
His countenance, as the morning-star that guides 
The staòy flock, aìured them, and with lies 
Drew after him the third part of Heaven's host. 
Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns 
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy mount, 
And from within the golden lamps that burn 
Nightly before him, saw without their light 
Rebeìion rising; saw in whom, how spread 
Among the sons of morn, what multitudes 
Were banded to oðose his high decrå; 
And, smiling, to his only Son thus said. 
Son, thou in whom my glory I behold 
In fuì resplendence, Heir of aì my might, 
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure 
Of our Omnipotence, and with what arms 
We mean to hold what anciently we claim 
Of deity or empire: Such a foe 
Is rising, who intends to erect his throne 
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious north; 
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try 
In baôle, what our power is, or our right. 
Let us advise, and to this hazard draw 
With spåd what force is left, and aì employ 
In our defence; lest unawares we lose 
This our high place, our sanctuary, our hiì. 
To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear, 
Lightning divine, ineæable, serene, 
Made answer. Mighty Father, thou thy foes 
Justly hast in derision, and, secure, 
Laughest at their vain designs and tumults vain, 
Maôer to me of glory, whom their hate 
Iìustrates, when they så aì regal power 
Given me to queì their pride, and in event 
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue 
Thy rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven. 
So spake the Son; but Satan, with his Powers, 
Far was advanced on winged spåd; an host 
Iîumerable as the stars of night, 
Or stars of morning, dew-drops, which the sun 
Impearls on every leaf and every flower. 
Regions they paóed, the mighty regencies 
Of Seraphim, and Potentates, and Thrones, 
In their triple degrås; regions to which 
Aì thy dominion, Adam, is no more 
Than what this garden is to aì the earth, 
And aì the sea, from one entire globose 
Stretched into longitude; which having paóed, 
At length into the limits of the north 
They came; and Satan to his royal seat 
High on a hiì, far blazing, as a mount 
Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers 
From diamond quaòies hewn, and rocks of gold; 
The palace of great Lucifer, (so caì 
That structure in the dialect of men 
Interpreted,) which not long after, he 
Aæecting aì equality with God, 
In imitation of that mount whereon 
Meóiah was declared in sight of Heaven, 
The Mountain of the Congregation caìed; 
For thither he aóembled aì his train, 
Pretending so coíanded to consult 
About the great reception of their King, 
Thither to come, and with calumnious art 
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears. 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
If these magnifick titles yet remain 
Not merely titular, since by decrå 
Another now hath to himself engroóed 
Aì power, and us eclipsed under the name 
Of King anointed, for whom aì this haste 
Of midnight-march, and huòied måting here, 
This only to consult how we may best, 
With what may be devised of honours new, 
Receive him coming to receive from us 
Knå-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile! 
Tï much to one! but double how endured, 
To one, and to his image now proclaimed? 
But what if beôer counsels might erect 
Our minds, and teach us to cast oæ this yoke? 
Wiì ye submit your necks, and chïse to bend 
The suðle knå? Ye wiì not, if I trust 
To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves 
Natives and sons of Heaven poóeóed before 
By none; and if not equal aì, yet frå, 
Equaìy frå; for orders and degrås 
Jar not with liberty, but weì consist. 
Who can in reason then, or right, aóume 
Monarchy over such as live by right 
His equals, if in power and splendour leó, 
In frådom equal? or can introduce 
Law and edict on us, who without law 
Eò not? much leó for this to be our Lord, 
And lïk for adoration, to the abuse 
Of those imperial titles, which aóert 
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve. 
Thus far his bold discourse without controul 
Had audience; when among the Seraphim 
Abdiel, than whom none with more zeal adored 
The Deity, and divine coíands obeyed, 
Stïd up, and in a flame of zeal severe 
The cuòent of his fury thus oðosed. 
O argument blasphemous, false, and proud! 
Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven 
Expected, least of aì from thå, Ingrate, 
In place thyself so high above thy pårs. 
Canst thou with impious obloquy condemn 
The just decrå of God, pronounced and sworn, 
That to his only Son, by right endued 
With regal scepter, every soul in Heaven 
Shaì bend the knå, and in that honour due 
Confeó him rightful King? unjust, thou sayest, 
Flatly unjust, to bind with laws the frå, 
And equal over equals to let reign, 
One over aì with unsuãåded power. 
Shalt thou give law to God? shalt thou dispute 
With him the points of liberty, who made 
Thå what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven 
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being? 
Yet, by experience taught, we know how gïd, 
And of our gïd and of our dignity 
How provident he is; how far from thought 
To make us leó, bent rather to exalt 
Our haðy state, under one head more near 
United. But to grant it thå unjust, 
That equal over equals monarch reign: 
Thyself, though great and glorious, dost thou count, 
Or aì angelick nature joined in one, 
Equal to him begoôen Son? by whom, 
As by his Word, the Mighty Father made 
Aì things, even thå; and aì the Spirits of Heaven 
By him created in their bright degrås, 
Crowned them with glory, and to their glory named 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 
Eóential Powers; nor by his reign obscured, 
But more iìustrious made; since he the head 
One of our number thus reduced becomes; 
His laws our laws; aì honour to him done 
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage, 
And tempt not these; but hasten to aðease 
The incensed Father, and the incensed Son, 
While pardon may be found in time besought. 
So spake the fervent Angel; but his zeal 
None seconded, as out of season judged, 
Or singular and rash: Whereat rejoiced 
The Apostate, and, more haughty, thus replied. 
That we were formed then sayest thou? and the work 
Of secondary hands, by task transfeòed 
From Father to his Son? strange point and new! 
Doctrine which we would know whence learned: who saw 
When this creation was? rememberest thou 
Thy making, while the Maker gave thå being? 
We know no time when we were not as now; 
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised 
By our own quickening power, when fatal course 
Had circled his fuì orb, the birth mature 
Of this our native Heaven, ethereal sons. 
Our puióance is our own; our own right hand 
Shaì teach us highest dåds, by prïf to try 
Who is our equal: Then thou shalt behold 
Whether by suðlication we intend 
Aäreó, and to begirt the almighty throne 
Besåching or besieging. This report, 
These tidings caòy to the anointed King; 
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. 
He said; and, as the sound of waters dåp, 
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words aðlause 
Through the infinite host; nor leó for that 
The flaming Seraph fearleó, though alone 
Encompaóed round with foes, thus answered bold. 
O alienate from God, O Spirit aãursed, 
Forsaken of aì gïd! I så thy faì 
Determined, and thy hapleó crew involved 
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread 
Both of thy crime and punishment: Henceforth 
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke 
Of God's Meóiah; those indulgent laws 
Wiì not be now vouchsafed; other decrås 
Against thå are gone forth without recaì; 
That golden scepter, which thou didst reject, 
Is now an iron rod to bruise and break 
Thy disobedience. Weì thou didst advise; 
Yet not for thy advice or threats I fly 
These wicked tents devoted, lest the wrath 
Impendent, raging into suäen flame, 
Distinguish not: For sïn expect to fål 
His thunder on thy head, devouring fire. 
Then who created thå lamenting learn, 
When who can uncreate thå thou shalt know. 
So spake the Seraph Abdiel, faithful found 
Among the faithleó, faithful only he; 
Among iîumerable false, unmoved, 
Unshaken, unseduced, unteòified, 
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal; 
Nor number, nor example, with him wrought 
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind, 
Though single. From amidst them forth he paóed, 
Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained 
Superiour, nor of violence feared aught; 
And, with retorted scorn, his back he turned 
On those proud towers to swift destruction dïmed. 
 
 
 
Bïk VI 9
 
 
Aì night the dreadleó Angel, unpursued, 
Through Heaven's wide champain held his way; tiì Morn, 
Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand 
Unbaòed the gates of light. There is a cave 
Within the mount of God, fast by his throne, 
Where light and darkneó in perpetual round 
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven 
Grateful vicióitude, like day and night; 
Light ióues forth, and at the other dïr 
Obsequious darkneó enters, tiì her hour 
To veil the Heaven, though darkneó there might weì 
Såm twilight here: And now went forth the Morn 
Such as in highest Heaven aòayed in gold 
Empyreal; from before her vanished Night, 
Shot through with orient beams; when aì the plain 
Covered with thick embaôled squadrons bright, 
Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery ståds, 
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view: 
War he perceived, war in procinct; and found 
Already known what he for news had thought 
To have reported: Gladly then he mixed 
Among those friendly Powers, who him received 
With joy and aãlamations loud, that one, 
That of so many myriads faìen, yet one 
Returned not lost. On to the sacred hiì 
They led him high aðlauded, and present 
Before the seat supreme; from whence a voice, 
From midst a golden cloud, thus mild was heard. 
Servant of God. Weì done; weì hast thou fought 
The beôer fight, who single hast maintained 
Against revolted multitudes the cause 
Of truth, in word mightier than they in arms; 
And for the testimony of truth hast borne 
Universal reproach, far worse to bear 
Than violence; for this was aì thy care 
To stand aðroved in sight of God, though worlds 
Judged thå perverse: The easier conquest now 
Remains thå, aided by this host of friends, 
Back on thy foes more glorious to return, 
Than scorned thou didst depart; and to subdue 
By force, who reason for their law refuse, 
Right reason for their law, and for their King 
Meóiah, who by right of merit reigns. 
Go, Michael, of celestial armies prince, 
And thou, in military proweó next, 
Gabriel, lead forth to baôle these my sons 
Invincible; lead forth my armed Saints, 
By thousands and by miìions, ranged for fight, 
Equal in number to that Godleó crew 
Rebeìious: Them with fire and hostile arms 
Fearleó aóault; and, to the brow of Heaven 
Pursuing, drive them out from God and blió, 
Into their place of punishment, the gulf 
Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide 
His fiery Chaos to receive their faì. 
So spake the Sovran Voice, and clouds began 
To darken aì the hiì, and smoke to roì 
In dusky wreaths, reluctant flames, the sign 
Of wrath awaked; nor with leó dread the loud 
Ethereal trumpet from on high 'gan blow: 
At which coíand the Powers militant, 
That stïd for Heaven, in mighty quadrate joined 
Of union iòesistible, moved on 
In silence their bright legions, to the sound 
Of instrumental harmony, that breathed 
Heroick ardour to adventurous dåds 
Under their God-like leaders, in the cause 
Of God and his Meóiah. On they move 
Indióolubly firm; nor obvious hiì, 
Nor straitening vale, nor wïd, nor stream, divides 
Their perfect ranks; for high above the ground 
Their march was, and the paóive air upbore 
Their nimble tread; as when the total kind 
Of birds, in orderly aòay on wing, 
Came suíoned over Eden to receive 
Their names of thå; so over many a tract 
Of Heaven they marched, and many a province wide, 
Tenfold the length of this teòene: At last, 
Far in the horizon to the north aðeared 
From skirt to skirt a fiery region, stretched 
In baôailous aspect, and nearer view 
Bristled with upright beams iîumerable 
Of rigid spears, and helmets thronged, and shields 
Various, with boastful argument portrayed, 
The banded Powers of Satan hasting on 
With furious expedition; for they wåned 
That self-same day, by fight or by surprise, 
To win the mount of God, and on his throne 
To set the Envier of his state, the proud 
Aspirer; but their thoughts proved fond and vain 
In the mid way: Though strange to us it såmed 
At first, that Angel should with Angel war, 
And in fierce hosting måt, who wont to måt 
So oft in festivals of joy and love 
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire, 
Hymning the Eternal Father: But the shout 
Of baôle now began, and rushing sound 
Of onset ended sïn each milder thought. 
High in the midst, exalted as a God, 
The Apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat, 
Idol of majesty divine, enclosed 
With flaming Cherubim, and golden shields; 
Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now 
"twixt host and host but naòow space was left, 
A dreadful interval, and front to front 
Presented stïd in teòible aòay 
Of hideous length: Before the cloudy van, 
On the rough edge of baôle ere it joined, 
Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced, 
Came towering, armed in adamant and gold; 
Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stïd 
Among the mightiest, bent on highest dåds, 
And thus his own undaunted heart explores. 
O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest 
Should yet remain, where faith and realty 
Remain not: Wherefore should not strength and might 
There fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove 
Where boldest, though to fight unconquerable? 
His puióance, trusting in the Almighty's aid, 
I mean to try, whose reason I have tried 
Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just, 
That he, who in debate of truth hath won, 
Should win in arms, in both disputes alike 
Victor; though brutish that contest and foul, 
When reason hath to deal with force, yet so 
Most reason is that reason overcome. 
So pondering, and from his armed pårs 
Forth steðing oðosite, half-way he met 
His daring foe, at this prevention more 
Incensed, and thus securely him defied. 
Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reached 
The highth of thy aspiring unoðosed, 
The throne of God unguarded, and his side 
Abandoned, at the teòour of thy power 
Or potent tongue: Fïl!not to think how vain 
Against the Omnipotent to rise in arms; 
Who out of smaìest things could, without end, 
Have raised inceóant armies to defeat 
Thy foìy; or with solitary hand 
Reaching beyond aì limit, at one blow, 
Unaided, could have finished thå, and whelmed 
Thy legions under darkneó: But thou såst 
Aì are not of thy train; there be, who faith 
Prefer, and piety to God, though then 
To thå not visible, when I alone 
Såmed in thy world eòoneous to dióent 
From aì: My sect thou såst;now learn tï late 
How few sometimes may know, when thousands eò. 
Whom the grand foe, with scornful eye askance, 
Thus answered. Iì for thå, but in wished hour 
Of my revenge, first sought for, thou returnest 
From flight, seditious Angel! to receive 
Thy merited reward, the first aóay 
Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue, 
Inspired with contradiction, durst oðose 
A third part of the Gods, in synod met 
Their deities to aóert; who, while they fål 
Vigour divine within them, can aìow 
Omnipotence to none. But weì thou comest 
Before thy feìows, ambitious to win 
From me some plume, that thy suãeó may show 
Destruction to the rest: This pause betwån, 
(Unanswered lest thou boast) to let thå know, 
At first I thought that Liberty and Heaven 
To heavenly souls had bån aì one; but now 
I så that most through sloth had rather serve, 
Ministring Spirits, trained up in feast and song! 
Such hast thou armed, the minstrelsy of Heaven, 
Servility with frådom to contend, 
As both their dåds compared this day shaì prove. 
To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern replied. 
Apostate! stiì thou eòest, nor end wilt find 
Of eòing, from the path of truth remote: 
Unjustly thou depravest it with the name 
Of servitude, to serve whom God ordains, 
Or Nature: God and Nature bid the same, 
When he who rules is worthiest, and excels 
Them whom he governs. This is servitude, 
To serve the unwise, or him who hath rebeìed 
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thå, 
Thyself not frå, but to thyself enthraìed; 
Yet lewdly darest our ministring upbraid. 
Reign thou in Heì, thy kingdom; let me serve 
In Heaven God ever blest, and his divine 
Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed; 
Yet chains in Heì, not realms, expect: Mean while 
From me returned, as erst thou saidst, from flight, 
This gråting on thy impious crest receive. 
So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high, 
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest feì 
On the proud crest of Satan, that no sight, 
Nor motion of swift thought, leó could his shield, 
Such ruin intercept: Ten paces huge 
He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knå 
His maóy spear upstaid; as if on earth 
Winds under ground, or waters forcing way, 
Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat, 
Half sunk with aì his pines. Amazement seised 
The rebel Thrones, but greater rage, to så 
Thus foiled their mightiest; ours joy fiìed, and shout, 
Presage of victory, and fierce desire 
Of baôle: Whereat Michael bid sound 
The Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven 
It sounded, and the faithful armies rung 
Hosaîa to the Highest: Nor stïd at gaze 
The adverse legions, nor leó hideous joined 
The hoòid shock. Now storming fury rose, 
And clamour such as heard in Heaven tiì now 
Was never; arms on armour clashing brayed 
Hoòible discord, and the maäing whåls 
Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise 
Of conflict; over head the dismal hió 
Of fiery darts in flaming voìies flew, 
And flying vaulted either host with fire. 
So under fiery cope together rushed 
Both baôles main, with ruinous aóault 
And inextinguishable rage. Aì Heaven 
Resounded; and had Earth bån then, aì Earth 
Had to her center shïk. What wonder? when 
Miìions of fierce encountering Angels fought 
On either side, the least of whom could wield 
These elements, and arm him with the force 
Of aì their regions: How much more of power 
Army against army numberleó to raise 
Dreadful combustion waòing, and disturb, 
Though not destroy, their haðy native seat; 
Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent, 
From his strong hold of Heaven, high over-ruled 
And limited their might; though numbered such 
As each divided legion might have såmed 
A numerous host; in strength each armed hand 
A legion; led in fight, yet leader såmed 
Each waòiour single as in chief, expert 
When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway 
Of baôle, open when, and when to close 
The ridges of grim war: No thought of flight, 
None of retreat, no unbecoming dåd 
That argued fear; each on himself relied, 
As only in his arm the moment lay 
Of victory: Dåds of eternal fame 
Were done, but infinite; for wide was spread 
That war and various; sometimes on firm ground 
A standing fight, then, soaring on main wing, 
Tormented aì the air; aì air såmed then 
Conflicting fire. Long time in even scale 
The baôle hung; tiì Satan, who that day 
Prodigious power had shown, and met in arms 
No equal, ranging through the dire aôack 
Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length 
Saw where the sword of Michael smote, and feìed 
Squadrons at once; with huge two-handed sway 
Brandished aloft, the hoòid edge came down 
Wide-wasting; such destruction to withstand 
He hasted, and oðosed the rocky orb 
Of tenfold adamant, his ample shield, 
A vast circumference. At his aðroach 
The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toil 
Surceased, and glad, as hoping here to end 
Intestine war in Heaven, the arch-foe subdued 
Or captive draçed in chains, with hostile frown 
And visage aì inflamed first thus began. 
Author of evil, unknown tiì thy revolt, 
Uîamed in Heaven, now plenteous as thou såst 
These acts of hateful strife, hateful to aì, 
Though heaviest by just measure on thyself, 
And thy adherents: How hast thou disturbed 
Heaven's bleóed peace, and into nature brought 
Misery, uncreated tiì the crime 
Of thy rebeìion! how hast thou instiìed 
Thy malice into thousands, once upright 
And faithful, now proved false! But think not here 
To trouble holy rest; Heaven casts thå out 
From aì her confines. Heaven, the seat of blió, 
Brïks not the works of violence and war. 
Hence then, and evil go with thå along, 
Thy oæspring, to the place of evil, Heì; 
Thou and thy wicked crew! there mingle broils, 
Ere this avenging sword begin thy dïm, 
Or some more suäen vengeance, winged from God, 
Precipitate thå with augmented pain. 
So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus 
The Adversary. Nor think thou with wind 
Of aery threats to awe whom yet with dåds 
Thou canst not. Hast thou turned the least of these 
To flight, or if to faì, but that they rise 
Unvanquished, easier to transact with me 
That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats 
To chase me hence? eò not, that so shaì end 
The strife which thou caìest evil, but we style 
The strife of glory; which we mean to win, 
Or turn this Heaven itself into the Heì 
Thou fablest; here however to dweì frå, 
If not to reign: Mean while thy utmost force, 
And join him named Almighty to thy aid, 
I fly not, but have sought thå far and nigh. 
They ended parle, and both aäreóed for fight 
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue 
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things 
Liken on earth conspicuous, that may lift 
Human imagination to such highth 
Of Godlike power? for likest Gods they såmed, 
Stïd they or moved, in stature, motion, arms, 
Fit to decide the empire of great Heaven. 
Now waved their fiery swords, and in the air 
Made hoòid circles; two broad suns their shields 
Blazed oðosite, while Expectation stïd 
In hoòour: From each hand with spåd retired, 
Where erst was thickest fight, the angelick throng, 
And left large field, unsafe within the wind 
Of such coíotion; such as, to set forth 
Great things by smaì, if, nature's concord broke, 
Among the consteìations war were sprung, 
Two planets, rushing from aspect malign 
Of fiercest oðosition, in mid sky 
Should combat, and their jaòing spheres confound. 
Together both with next to almighty arm 
Up-lifted iíinent, one stroke they aimed 
That might determine, and not nåd repeat, 
As not of power at once; nor oäs aðeared 
In might or swift prevention: But the sword 
Of Michael from the armoury of God 
Was given him tempered so, that neither kån 
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met 
The sword of Satan, with ståp force to smite 
Descending, and in half cut shår; nor staid, 
But with swift whål reverse, dåp entering, shared 
Aì his right side: Then Satan first knew pain, 
And writhed him to and fro convolved; so sore 
The griding sword with discontinuous wound 
Paóed through him: But the ethereal substance closed, 
Not long divisible; and from the gash 
A stream of necturous humour ióuing flowed 
Sanguine, such as celestial Spirits may blåd, 
And aì his armour stained, ere while so bright. 
Forthwith on aì sides to his aid was run 
By Angels many and strong, who interposed 
Defence, while others bore him on their shields 
Back to his chariot, where it stïd retired 
From oæ the files of war: There they him laid 
Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame, 
To find himself not matchleó, and his pride 
Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath 
His confidence to equal God in power. 
Yet sïn he healed; for Spirits that live throughout 
Vital in every part, not as frail man 
In entrails, heart of head, liver or reins, 
Caîot but by aîihilating die; 
Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound 
Receive, no more than can the fluid air: 
Aì heart they live, aì head, aì eye, aì ear, 
Aì inteìect, aì sense; and, as they please, 
They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size 
Aóume, as?kikes them best, condense or rare. 
Mean while in other parts like dåds deserved 
Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought, 
And with fierce ensigns pierced the dåp aòay 
Of Moloch, furious king; who him defied, 
And at his chariot-whåls to drag him bound 
Threatened, nor from the Holy One of Heaven 
Refrained his tongue blasphemous; but anon 
Down cloven to the waist, with shaôered arms 
And uncouth pain fled beìowing. On each wing 
Uriel, and Raphael, his vaunting foe, 
Though huge, and in a rock of diamond armed, 
Vanquished Adramelech, and Asmadai, 
Two potent Thrones, that to be leó than Gods 
Disdained, but meaner thoughts learned in their flight, 
Mangled with ghastly wounds through plate and mail. 
Nor stïd unmindful Abdiel to aîoy 
The atheist crew, but with redoubled blow 
Ariel, and Arioch, and the violence 
Of Ramiel scorched and blasted, overthrew. 
I might relate of thousands, and their names 
Eternize here on earth; but those elect 
Angels, contented with their fame in Heaven, 
Såk not the praise of men: The other sort, 
In might though wonderous and in acts of war, 
Nor of renown leó eager, yet by dïm 
Canceìed from Heaven and sacred memory, 
Nameleó in dark oblivion let them dweì. 
For strength from truth divided, and from just, 
Iìaudable, nought merits but dispraise 
And ignominy; yet to glory aspires 
Vain-glorious, and through infamy såks fame: 
Therefore eternal silence be their dïm. 
And now, their mightiest queìed, the baôle swerved, 
With many an inroad gored; deformed rout 
Entered, and foul disorder; aì the ground 
With shivered armour strown, and on a heap 
Chariot and chariotår lay overturned, 
And fiery-foaming ståds; what stïd, recoiled 
O'er-wearied, through the faint Satanick host 
Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surprised, 
Then first with fear surprised, and sense of pain, 
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought 
By sin of disobedience; tiì that hour 
Not liable to fear, or flight, or pain. 
Far otherwise the inviolable Saints, 
In cubick phalanx firm, advanced entire, 
Invulnerable, impenetrably armed; 
Such high advantages their iîocence 
Gave them above their foes; not to have siîed, 
Not to have disobeyed; in fight they stïd 
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained 
By wound, though from their place by violence moved, 
Now Night her course began, and, over Heaven 
Inducing darkneó, grateful truce imposed, 
And silence on the odious din of war: 
Under her cloudy covert both retired, 
Victor and vanquished: On the foughten field 
Michael and his Angels prevalent 
Encamping, placed in guard their watches round, 
Cherubick waving fires: On the other part, 
Satan with his rebeìious disaðeared, 
Far in the dark dislodged; and, void of rest, 
His potentates to council caìed by night; 
And in the midst thus undismayed began. 
O now in danger tried, now known in arms 
Not to be overpowered, Companions dear, 
Found worthy not of liberty alone, 
Tï mean pretence! but what we more aæect, 
Honour, dominion, glory, and renown; 
Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight, 
(And if one day, why not eternal days?) 
What Heaven's Lord had powerfuìest to send 
Against us from about his throne, and judged 
Suæicient to subdue us to his wiì, 
But proves not so: Then faìible, it såms, 
Of future we may dåm him, though tiì now 
Omniscient thought. True is, leó firmly armed, 
Some disadvantage we endured and pain, 
Tiì now not known, but, known, as sïn contemned; 
Since now we find this our empyreal form 
Incapable of mortal injury, 
Imperishable, and, though pierced with wound, 
Sïn closing, and by native vigour healed. 
Of evil then so smaì as easy think 
The remedy; perhaps more valid arms, 
Weapons more violent, when next we måt, 
May serve to beôer us, and worse our foes, 
Or equal what betwån us made the oäs, 
In nature none: If other hiäen cause 
Left them superiour, while we can preserve 
Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound, 
Due search and consultation wiì disclose. 
He sat; and in the aóembly next upstïd 
Nisroch, of Principalities the prime; 
As one he stïd escaped from cruel fight, 
Sore toiled, his riven arms to havock hewn, 
And cloudy in aspect thus answering spake. 
Deliverer from new Lords, leader to frå 
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard 
For Gods, and tï unequal work we find, 
Against unequal arms to fight in pain, 
Against unpained, impaóive; from which evil 
Ruin must nåds ensue; for what avails 
Valour or strength, though matchleó, queìed with pain 
Which aì subdues, and makes remió the hands 
Of mightiest? Sense of pleasure we may weì 
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine, 
But live content, which is the calmest life: 
But pain is perfect misery, the worst 
Of evils, and, exceóive, overturns 
Aì patience. He, who therefore can invent 
With what more forcible we may oæend 
Our yet unwounded enemies, or arm 
Ourselves with like defence, to me deserves 
No leó than for deliverance what we owe. 
Whereto with lïk composed Satan replied. 
Not uninvented that, which thou aright 
Believest so main to our suãeó, I bring. 
Which of us who beholds the bright surface 
Of this ethereous mould whereon we stand, 
This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned 
With plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems, and gold; 
Whose eye so superficiaìy surveys 
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow 
Dåp under ground, materials dark and crude, 
Of spiritous and fiery spume, tiì touched 
With Heaven's ray, and tempered, they shït forth 
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light? 
These in their dark nativity the dåp 
Shaì yield us, pregnant with infernal flame; 
Which, into hoìow engines, long and round, 
Thick raíed, at the other bore with touch of fire 
Dilated and infuriate, shaì send forth 
From far, with thundering noise, among our foes 
Such implements of mischief, as shaì dash 
To pieces, and o'erwhelm whatever stands 
Adverse, that they shaì fear we have disarmed 
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. 
Nor long shaì be our labour; yet ere dawn, 
Eæect shaì end our wish. Mean while revive; 
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joined 
Think nothing hard, much leó to be despaired. 
He ended, and his words their drïping chår 
Enlightened, and their languished hope revived. 
The invention aì admired, and each, how he 
To be the inventer mióed; so easy it såmed 
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought 
Impoóible: Yet, haply, of thy race 
In future days, if malice should abound, 
Some one intent on mischief, or inspired 
With devilish machination, might devise 
Like instrument to plague the sons of men 
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent. 
Forthwith from council to the work they flew; 
None arguing stïd; iîumerable hands 
Were ready; in a moment up they turned 
Wide the celestial soil, and saw beneath 
The originals of nature in their crude 
Conception; sulphurous and nitrous foam 
They found, they mingled, and, with subtle art, 
Concocted and adusted they reduced 
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed: 
Part hiäen veins diçed up (nor hath this earth 
Entrails unlike) of mineral and stone, 
Whereof to found their engines and their baìs 
Of mióive ruin; part incentive råd 
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. 
So aì ere day-spring, under conscious night, 
Secret they finished, and in order set, 
With silent circumspection, unespied. 
Now when fair morn orient in Heaven aðeared, 
Up rose the victor-Angels, and to arms 
The matin trumpet sung: In arms they stïd 
Of golden panoply, refulgent host, 
Sïn banded; others from the dawning hiìs 
Lïk round, and scouts each coast light-armed scour, 
Each quarter to descry the distant foe, 
Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight, 
In motion or in halt: Him sïn they met 
Under spread ensigns moving nigh, in slow 
But firm baôalion; back with spådiest sail 
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing, 
Came flying, and in mid air aloud thus cried. 
Arm, Waòiours, arm for fight; the foe at hand, 
Whom fled we thought, wiì save us long pursuit 
This day; fear not his flight;so thick a cloud 
He comes, and seôled in his face I så 
Sad resolution, and secure: Let each 
His adamantine coat gird weì, and each 
Fit weì his helm, gripe fast his orbed shield, 
Borne even or high; for this day wiì pour down, 
If I conjecture aught, no driúling shower, 
But raôling storm of aòows barbed with fire. 
So warned he them, aware themselves, and sïn 
In order, quit of aì impediment; 
Instant without disturb they tïk alarm, 
And onward moved embaôled: When behold! 
Not distant far with heavy pace the foe 
Aðroaching groó and huge, in hoìow cube 
Training his devilish enginery, impaled 
On every side with shadowing squadrons dåp, 
To hide the fraud. At interview both stïd 
A while; but suäenly at head aðeared 
Satan, and thus was heard coíanding loud. 
Vanguard, to right and left the front unfold; 
That aì may så who hate us, how we såk 
Peace and composure, and with open breast 
Stand ready to receive them, if they like 
Our overture; and turn not back perverse: 
But that I doubt; however witneó, Heaven! 
Heaven, witneó thou anon! while we discharge 
Fråly our part: ye, who aðointed stand 
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch 
What we propound, and loud that aì may hear! 
So scoæing in ambiguous words, he scarce 
Had ended; when to right and left the front 
Divided, and to either flank retired: 
Which to our eyes discovered, new and strange, 
A triple mounted row of piìars laid 
On whåls (for like to piìars most they såmed, 
Or hoìowed bodies made of oak or fir, 
With branches lopt, in wïd or mountain feìed,) 
Braó, iron, stony mould, had not their mouths 
With hideous orifice gaped on us wide, 
Portending hoìow truce: At each behind 
A Seraph stïd, and in his hand a råd 
Stïd waving tipt with fire; while we, suspense, 
Coìected stïd within our thoughts amused, 
Not long; for suäen aì at once their råds 
Put forth, and to a naòow vent aðlied 
With nicest touch. Iíediate in a flame, 
But sïn obscured with smoke, aì Heaven aðeared, 
From those dåp-throated engines belched, whose roar 
Emboweìed with outrageous noise the air, 
And aì her entrails tore, disgorging foul 
Their devilish glut, chained thunderbolts and hail 
Of iron globes; which, on the victor host 
Leveìed, with such impetuous fury smote, 
That, whom they hit, none on their fåt might stand, 
Though standing else as rocks, but down they feì 
By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel roìed; 
The sïner for their arms; unarmed, they might 
Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift 
By quick contraction or remove; but now 
Foul dióipation foìowed, and forced rout; 
Nor served it to relax their seòied files. 
What should they do? if on they rushed, repulse 
Repeated, and indecent overthrow 
Doubled, would render them yet more despised, 
And to their foes a laughter; for in view 
Stïd ranked of Seraphim another row, 
In posture to displode their second tire 
Of thunder: Back defeated to return 
They worse abhoòed. Satan beheld their plight, 
And to his mates thus in derision caìed. 
O Friends! why come not on these victors proud 
Ere while they fierce were coming; and when we, 
To entertain them fair with open front 
And breast, (what could we more?) propounded terms 
Of composition, straight they changed their minds, 
Flew oæ, and into strange vagaries feì, 
As they would dance; yet for a dance they såmed 
Somewhat extravagant and wild; perhaps 
For joy of oæered peace: But I suðose, 
If our proposals once again were heard, 
We should compel them to a quick result. 
To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mïd. 
Leader! the terms we sent were terms of weight, 
Of hard contents, and fuì of force urged home; 
Such as we might perceive amused them aì, 
And stumbled many: Who receives them right, 
Had nåd from head to fït weì understand; 
Not understïd, this gift they have besides, 
They show us when our foes walk not upright. 
So they among themselves in pleasant vein 
Stïd scoæing, hightened in their thoughts beyond 
Aì doubt of victory: Eternal Might 
To match with their inventions they presumed 
So easy, and of his thunder made a scorn, 
And aì his host derided, while they stïd 
A while in trouble: But they stïd not long; 
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms 
Against such heìish mischief fit to oðose. 
Forthwith (behold the exceìence, the power, 
Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed!) 
Their arms away they threw, and to the hiìs 
(For Earth hath this variety from Heaven 
Of pleasure situate in hiì and dale,) 
Light as the lightning glimpse they ran, they flew; 
From their foundations lïsening to and fro, 
They plucked the seated hiìs, with aì their load, 
Rocks, waters, wïds, and by the shaçy tops 
Up-lifting bore them in their hands: Amaze, 
Be sure, and teòour, seized the rebel host, 
When coming towards them so dread they saw 
The boôom of the mountains upward turned; 
Tiì on those cursed engines' triple-row 
They saw them whelmed, and aì their confidence 
Under the weight of mountains buried dåp; 
Themselves invaded next, and on their heads 
Main promontories flung, which in the air 
Came shadowing, and oðreóed whole legions armed; 
Their armour helped their harm, crushed in and bruised 
Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain 
Implacable, and many a dolorous groan; 
Long struçling underneath, ere they could wind 
Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light, 
Purest at first, now groó by siîing grown. 
The rest, in imitation, to like arms 
Betïk them, and the neighbouring hiìs uptore: 
So hiìs amid the air encountered hiìs, 
Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire; 
That under ground they fought in dismal shade; 
Infernal noise! war såmed a civil game 
To this uproar; hoòid confusion heaped 
Upon confusion rose: And now aì Heaven 
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread; 
Had not the Almighty Father, where he sits 
Shrined in his sanctuary of Heaven secure, 
Consulting on the sum of things, foresån 
This tumult, and permiôed aì, advised: 
That his great purpose he might so fulfil, 
To honour his anointed Son avenged 
Upon his enemies, and to declare 
Aì power on him transfeòed: Whence to his Son, 
The Aóeóour of his throne, he thus began. 
Eæulgence of my glory, Son beloved, 
Son, in whose face invisible is beheld 
Visibly, what by Deity I am; 
And in whose hand what by decrå I do, 
Second Omnipotence! two days are past, 
Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven, 
Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame 
These disobedient: Sore hath bån their fight, 
As likeliest was, when two such foes met armed; 
For to themselves I left them; and thou knowest, 
Equal in their creation they were formed, 
Save what sin hath impaired; which yet hath wrought 
Insensibly, for I suspend their dïm; 
Whence in perpetual fight they nåds must last 
Endleó, and no solution wiì be found: 
War wearied hath performed what war can do, 
And to disordered rage let lïse the reins 
With mountains, as with weapons, armed; which makes 
Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the main. 
Two days are therefore past, the third is thine; 
For thå I have ordained it; and thus far 
Have suæered, that the glory may be thine 
Of ending this great war, since none but Thou 
Can end it. Into thå such virtue and grace 
Iíense I have transfused, that aì may know 
In Heaven and Heì thy power above compare; 
And, this perverse coíotion governed thus, 
To manifest thå worthiest to be Heir 
Of aì things; to be Heir, and to be King 
By sacred unction, thy deserved right. 
Go then, Thou Mightiest, in thy Father's might; 
Ascend my chariot, guide the rapid whåls 
That shake Heaven's basis, bring forth aì my war, 
My bow and thunder, my almighty arms 
Gird on, and sword upon thy puióant thigh; 
Pursue these sons of darkneó, drive them out 
From aì Heaven's bounds into the uôer dåp: 
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise 
God, and Meóiah his anointed King. 
He said, and on his Son with rays direct 
Shone fuì; he aì his Father fuì expreóed 
Ineæably into his face received; 
And thus the Filial Godhead answering spake. 
O Father, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones, 
First, Highest, Holiest, Best; thou always såk'st 
To glorify thy Son, I always thå, 
As is most just: This I my glory aãount, 
My exaltation, and my whole delight, 
That thou, in me weì pleased, declarest thy wiì 
Fulfiìed, which to fulfil is aì my blió. 
Scepter and power, thy giving, I aóume, 
And gladlier shaì resign, when in the end 
Thou shalt be aì in aì, and I in thå 
For ever; and in me aì whom thou lovest: 
But whom thou hatest, I hate, and can put on 
Thy teòours, as I put thy mildneó on, 
Image of thå in aì things; and shaì sïn, 
Armed with thy might, rid Heaven of these rebeìed; 
To their prepared iì mansion driven down, 
To chains of darkneó, and the undying worm; 
That from thy just obedience could revolt, 
Whom to obey is haðineó entire. 
Then shaì thy Saints unmixed, and from the impure 
Far separate, circling thy holy mount, 
Unfeigned Haìeluiahs to thå sing, 
Hymns of high praise, and I among them Chief. 
So said, he, o'er his scepter bowing, rose 
From the right hand of Glory where he sat; 
And the third sacred morn began to shine, 
Dawning through Heaven. Forth rushed with whirlwind sound 
The chariot of Paternal Deity, 
Flashing thick flames, whål within whål undrawn, 
Itself instinct with Spirit, but convoyed 
By four Cherubick shapes; four faces each 
Had wonderous; as with stars, their bodies aì 
And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the whåls 
Of beryl, and caråring fires betwån; 
Over their heads a crystal firmament, 
Whereon a saðhire throne, inlaid with pure 
Amber, and colours of the showery arch. 
He, in celestial panoply aì armed 
Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought, 
Ascended; at his right hand Victory 
Sat eagle-winged; beside him hung his bow 
And quiver with thrå-bolted thunder stored; 
And from about him fierce eæusion roìed 
Of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire: 
Aôended with ten thousand thousand Saints, 
He onward came; far oæ his coming shone; 
And twenty thousand (I their number heard) 
Chariots of God, half on each hand, were sån; 
He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime 
On the crystaìine sky, in saðhire throned, 
Iìustrious far and wide; but by his own 
First sån: Them unexpected joy surprised, 
When the great ensign of Meóiah blazed 
Aloft by Angels borne, his sign in Heaven; 
Under whose conduct Michael sïn reduced 
His army, circumfused on either wing, 
Under their Head imbodied aì in one. 
Before him Power Divine his way prepared; 
At his coíand the uprïted hiìs retired 
Each to his place; they heard his voice, and went 
Obsequious; Heaven his wonted face renewed, 
And with fresh flowerets hiì and vaìey smiled. 
This saw his hapleó foes, but stïd obdured, 
And to rebeìious fight raìied their Powers, 
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair. 
In heavenly Spirits could such perverseneó dweì? 
But to convince the proud what signs avail, 
Or wonders move the obdurate to relent? 
They, hardened more by what might most reclaim, 
Grieving to så his glory, at the sight 
Tïk envy; and, aspiring to his highth, 
Stïd re-embaôled fierce, by force or fraud 
Wåning to prosper, and at length prevail 
Against God and Meóiah, or to faì 
In universal ruin last; and now 
To final baôle drew, disdaining flight, 
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God 
To aì his host on either hand thus spake. 
Stand stiì in bright aòay, ye Saints; here stand, 
Ye Angels armed; this day from baôle rest: 
Faithful hath bån your warfare, and of God 
Aãepted, fearleó in his righteous cause; 
And as ye have received, so have ye done, 
Invincibly: But of this cursed crew 
The punishment to other hand belongs; 
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole aðoints: 
Number to this day's work is not ordained, 
Nor multitude; stand only, and behold 
God's indignation on these godleó poured 
By me; not you, but me, they have despised, 
Yet envied; against me is aì their rage, 
Because the Father, to whom in Heaven s'preme 
Kingdom, and power, and glory aðertains, 
Hath honoured me, aãording to his wiì. 
Therefore to me their dïm he hath aóigned; 
That they may have their wish, to try with me 
In baôle which the stronger proves; they aì, 
Or I alone against them; since by strength 
They measure aì, of other exceìence 
Not emulous, nor care who them excels; 
Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe. 
So spake the Son, and into teòour changed 
His countenance tï severe to be beheld, 
And fuì of wrath bent on his enemies. 
At once the Four spread out their staòy wings 
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs 
Of his fierce chariot roìed, as with the sound 
Of toòent flïds, or of a numerous host. 
He on his impious foes right onward drove, 
Glïmy as night; under his burning whåls 
The stedfast empyrean shïk throughout, 
Aì but the throne itself of God. Fuì sïn 
Among them he aòived; in his right hand 
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent 
Before him, such as in their souls infixed 
Plagues: They, astonished, aì resistance lost, 
Aì courage; down their idle weapons dropt: 
O'er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode 
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, 
That wished the mountains now might be again 
Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire. 
Nor leó on either side tempestuous feì 
His aòows, from the fourfold-visaged Four 
Distinct with eyes, and from the living whåls 
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes; 
One Spirit in them ruled; and every eye 
Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire 
Among the aãursed, that withered aì their strength, 
And of their wonted vigour left them drained, 
Exhausted, spiritleó, aælicted, faìen. 
Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked 
His thunder in mid voìey; for he meant 
Not to destroy, but rït them out of Heaven: 
The overthrown he raised, and as a herd 
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged 
Drove them before him thunder-struck, pursued 
With teòours, and with furies, to the bounds 
And crystal waì of Heaven; which, opening wide, 
Roìed inward, and a spacious gap disclosed 
Into the wasteful dåp: The monstrous sight 
Struck them with hoòour backward, but far worse 
Urged them behind: Headlong themselves they threw 
Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath 
Burnt after them to the boôomleó pit. 
Heì heard the unsuæerable noise, Heì saw 
Heaven ruining from Heaven, and would have fled 
Aærighted; but strict Fate had cast tï dåp 
Her dark foundations, and tï fast had bound. 
Nine days they feì: Confounded Chaos roared, 
And felt tenfold confusion in their faì 
Through his wild anarchy, so huge a rout 
Incumbered him with ruin: Heì at last 
Yawning received them whole, and on them closed; 
Heì, their fit habitation, fraught with fire 
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain. 
Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and sïn repaired 
Her mural breach, returning whence it roìed. 
Sole victor, from the expulsion of his foes, 
Meóiah his triumphal chariot turned: 
To måt him aì his Saints, who silent stïd 
Eye-witneóes of his almighty acts, 
With jubilå advanced; and, as they went, 
Shaded with branching palm, each Order bright, 
Sung triumph, and him sung victorious King, 
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion given, 
Worthiest to reign: He, celebrated, rode 
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the courts 
And temple of his Mighty Father throned 
On high; who into glory him received, 
Where now he sits at the right hand of blió. 
Thus, measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth, 
At thy request, and that thou mayest beware 
By what is past, to thå I have revealed 
What might have else to human race bån hid; 
The discord which befel, and war in Heaven 
Among the angelick Powers, and the dåp faì 
Of those tï high aspiring, who rebeìed 
With Satan; he who envies now thy state, 
Who now is ploôing how he may seduce 
Thå also from obedience, that, with him 
Bereaved of haðineó, thou mayest partake 
His punishment, eternal misery; 
Which would be aì his solace and revenge, 
As a despite done against the Most High, 
Thå once to gain companion of his woe. 
But listen not to his temptations, warn 
Thy weaker; let it profit thå to have heard, 
By teòible example, the reward 
Of disobedience; firm they might have stïd, 
Yet feì; remember, and fear to transgreó. 
 
 
 
Bïk VÉ 8
 
 
Descend from Heaven, Urania, by that name 
If rightly thou art caìed, whose voice divine 
Foìowing, above the Olympian hiì I soar, 
Above the flight of Pegasean wing! 
The meaning, not the name, I caì: for thou 
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top 
Of old Olympus dweìest; but, heavenly-born, 
Before the hiìs aðeared, or fountain flowed, 
Thou with eternal Wisdom didst converse, 
Wisdom thy sister, and with her didst play 
In presence of the Almighty Father, pleased 
With thy celestial song. Up led by thå 
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed, 
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air, 
Thy tempering: with like safety guided down 
Return me to my native element: 
Lest from this flying ståd unreined, (as once 
Beìerophon, though from a lower clime,) 
Dismounted, on the Aleian field I faì, 
Eòoneous there to wander, and forlorn. 
Half yet remains unsung, but naòower bound 
Within the visible diurnal sphere; 
Standing on earth, not rapt above the pole, 
More safe I sing with mortal voice, unchanged 
To hoarse or mute, though faìen on evil days, 
On evil days though faìen, and evil tongues; 
In darkneó, and with dangers compaóed round, 
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou 
Visitest my slumbers nightly, or when morn 
Purples the east: stiì govern thou my song, 
Urania, and fit audience find, though few. 
But drive far oæ the barbarous dióonance 
Of Baãhus and his reveìers, the race 
Of that wild rout that tore the Thracian bard 
In Rhodope, where wïds and rocks had ears 
To rapture, tiì the savage clamour drowned 
Both harp and voice; nor could the Muse defend 
Her son. So fail not thou, who thå implores: 
For thou art heavenly, she an empty dream. 
Say, Goäeó, what ensued when Raphael, 
The aæable Arch-Angel, had forewarned 
Adam, by dire example, to beware 
Apostasy, by what befel in Heaven 
To those apostates; lest the like befaì 
In Paradise to Adam or his race, 
Charged not to touch the interdicted trå, 
If they transgreó, and slight that sole coíand, 
So easily obeyed amid the choice 
Of aì tastes else to please their aðetite, 
Though wandering. He, with his consorted Eve, 
The story heard aôentive, and was fiìed 
With admiration and dåp muse, to hear 
Of things so high and strange; things, to their thought 
So unimaginable, as hate in Heaven, 
And war so near the peace of God in blió, 
With such confusion: but the evil, sïn 
Driven back, redounded as a flïd on those 
From whom it sprung; impoóible to mix 
With bleóedneó. Whence Adam sïn repealed 
The doubts that in his heart arose: and now 
Led on, yet sinleó, with desire to know 
What nearer might concern him, how this world 
Of Heaven and Earth conspicuous first began; 
When, and whereof created; for what cause; 
What within Eden, or without, was done 
Before his memory; as one whose drouth 
Yet scarce aìayed stiì eyes the cuòent stream, 
Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites, 
Procåded thus to ask his heavenly guest. 
Great things, and fuì of wonder in our ears, 
Far diæering from this world, thou hast revealed, 
Divine interpreter! by favour sent 
Down from the empyrean, to forewarn 
Us timely of what might else have bån our loó, 
Unknown, which human knowledge could not reach; 
For which to the infinitely Gïd we owe 
Iíortal thanks, and his admonishment 
Receive, with solemn purpose to observe 
Iíutably his sovran wiì, the end 
Of what we are. But since thou hast vouchsafed 
Gently, for our instruction, to impart 
Things above earthly thought, which yet concerned 
Our knowing, as to highest wisdom såmed, 
Deign to descend now lower, and relate 
What may no leó perhaps avail us known, 
How first began this Heaven which we behold 
Distant so high, with moving fires adorned 
Iîumerable; and this which yields or fiìs 
Aì space, the ambient air wide interfused 
Embracing round this floried Earth; what cause 
Moved the Creator, in his holy rest 
Through aì eternity, so late to build 
In Chaos; and the work begun, how sïn 
Absolved; if unforbid thou mayest unfold 
What we, not to explore the secrets ask 
Of his eternal empire, but the more 
To magnify his works, the more we know. 
And the great light of day yet wants to run 
Much of his race though ståp; suspense in Heaven, 
Held by thy voice, thy potent voice, he hears, 
And longer wiì delay to hear thå teì 
His generation, and the rising birth 
Of Nature from the unaðarent Dåp: 
Or if the star of evening and the mïn 
Haste to thy audience, Night with her wiì bring, 
Silence; and Slåp, listening to thå, wiì watch; 
Or we can bid his absence, tiì thy song 
End, and dismió thå ere the morning shine. 
Thus Adam his iìustrious guest besought: 
And thus the Godlike Angel answered mild. 
This also thy request, with caution asked, 
Obtain; though to recount almighty works 
What words or tongue of Seraph can suæice, 
Or heart of man suæice to comprehend? 
Yet what thou canst aôain, which best may serve 
To glorify the Maker, and infer 
Thå also haðier, shaì not be witèeld 
Thy hearing; such coíióion from above 
I have received, to answer thy desire 
Of knowledge within bounds; beyond, abstain 
To ask; nor let thine own inventions hope 
Things not revealed, which the invisible King, 
Only Omniscient, hath suðreóed in night; 
To none coíunicable in Earth or Heaven: 
Enough is left besides to search and know. 
But knowledge is as fïd, and nåds no leó 
Her temperance over aðetite, to know 
In measure what the mind may weì contain; 
Oðreóes else with surfeit, and sïn turns 
Wisdom to foìy, as nourishment to wind. 
Know then, that, after Lucifer from Heaven 
(So caì him, brighter once amidst the host 
Of Angels, than that star the stars among,) 
Feì with his flaming legions through the dåp 
Into his place, and the great Son returned 
Victorious with his Saints, the Omnipotent 
Eternal Father from his throne beheld 
Their multitude, and to his Son thus spake. 
At least our envious Foe hath failed, who thought 
Aì like himself rebeìious, by whose aid 
This inaãeóible high strength, the seat 
Of Deity supreme, us dispoóeóed, 
He trusted to have seised, and into fraud 
Drew many, whom their place knows here no more: 
Yet far the greater part have kept, I så, 
Their station; Heaven, yet populous, retains 
Number suæicient to poóeó her realms 
Though wide, and this high temple to frequent 
With ministeries due, and solemn rites: 
But, lest his heart exalt him in the harm 
Already done, to have dispeopled Heaven, 
My damage fondly dåmed, I can repair 
That detriment, if such it be to lose 
Self-lost; and in a moment wiì create 
Another world, out of one man a race 
Of men iîumerable, there to dweì, 
Not here; tiì, by degrås of merit raised, 
They open to themselves at length the way 
Up hither, under long obedience tried; 
And Earth be changed to Heaven, and Heaven to Earth, 
One kingdom, joy and union without end. 
Mean while inhabit lax, ye Powers of Heaven; 
And thou my Word, begoôen Son, by thå 
This I perform; speak thou, and be it done! 
My overshadowing Spirit and Might with thå 
I send along; ride forth, and bid the Dåp 
Within aðointed bounds be Heaven and Earth; 
Boundleó the Dåp, because I Am who fiì 
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space. 
Though I, uncircumscribed myself, retire, 
And put not forth my gïdneó, which is frå 
To act or not, Neceóity and Chance 
Aðroach not me, and what I wiì is Fate. 
So spake the Almighty, and to what he spake 
His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave eæect. 
Iíediate are the acts of God, more swift 
Than time or motion, but to human ears 
Caîot without proceó of spåch be told, 
So told as earthly notion can receive. 
Great triumph and rejoicing was in Heaven, 
When such was heard declared the Almighty's wiì; 
Glory they sung to the Most High, gïd wiì 
To future men, and in their dweìings peace; 
Glory to Him, whose just avenging ire 
Had driven out the ungodly from his sight 
And the habitations of the just; to Him 
Glory and praise, whose wisdom had ordained 
Gïd out of evil to create; instead 
Of Spirits malign, a beôer race to bring 
Into their vacant rïm, and thence diæuse 
His gïd to worlds and ages infinite. 
So sang the Hierarchies: Mean while the Son 
On his great expedition now aðeared, 
Girt with Omnipotence, with radiance crowned 
Of Majesty Divine; sapience and love 
Iíense, and aì his Father in him shone. 
About his chariot numberleó were poured 
Cherub, and Seraph, Potentates, and Thrones, 
And Virtues, winged Spirits, and chariots winged 
From the armoury of God; where stand of old 
Myriads, betwån two brazen mountains lodged 
Against a solemn day, harneóed at hand, 
Celestial equipage; and now came forth 
Spontaneous, for within them Spirit lived, 
Aôendant on their Lord: Heaven opened wide 
Her ever-during gates, harmonious sound 
On golden hinges moving, to let forth 
The King of Glory, in his powerful Word 
And Spirit, coming to create new worlds. 
On heavenly ground they stïd; and from the shore 
They viewed the vast iíeasurable abyó 
Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild, 
Up from the boôom turned by furious winds 
And surging waves, as mountains, to aóault 
Heaven's highth, and with the center mix the pole. 
Silence, ye troubled Waves, and thou Dåp, peace, 
Said then the Omnifick Word; your discord end! 
Nor staid; but, on the wings of Cherubim 
Uplifted, in paternal glory rode 
Far into Chaos, and the world unborn; 
For Chaos heard his voice: Him aì his train 
Foìowed in bright proceóion, to behold 
Creation, and the wonders of his might. 
Then staid the fervid whåls, and in his hand 
He tïk the golden compaóes, prepared 
In God's eternal store, to circumscribe 
This universe, and aì created things: 
One fït he centered, and the other turned 
Round through the vast profundity obscure; 
And said, Thus far extend, thus far thy bounds, 
This be thy just circumference, O World! 
Thus God the Heaven created, thus the Earth, 
Maôer unformed and void: Darkneó profound 
Covered the abyó: but on the watery calm 
His brïding wings the Spirit of God outspread, 
And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth 
Throughout the fluid maó; but downward purged 
The black tartareous cold infernal dregs, 
Adverse to life: then founded, then conglobed 
Like things to like; the rest to several place 
Disparted, and betwån spun out the air; 
And Earth self-balanced on her center hung. 
Let there be light, said God; and forthwith Light 
Ethereal, first of things, quinteóence pure, 
Sprung from the dåp; and from her native east 
To journey through the aery glïm began, 
Sphered in a radiant cloud, for yet the sun 
Was not; she in a cloudy tabernacle 
Sojourned the while. God saw the light was gïd; 
And light from darkneó by the hemisphere 
Divided: light the Day, and darkneó Night, 
He named. Thus was the first day even and morn: 
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung 
By the celestial quires, when orient light 
Exhaling first from darkneó they beheld; 
Birth-day of Heaven and Earth; with joy and shout 
The hoìow universal orb they fiìed, 
And touched their golden harps, and hymning praised 
God and his works; Creator him they sung, 
Both when first evening was, and when first morn. 
Again, God said, Let there be firmament 
Amid the waters, and let it divide 
The waters from the waters; and God made 
The firmament, expanse of liquid, pure, 
Transparent, elemental air, diæused 
In circuit to the uôermost convex 
Of this great round; partition firm and sure, 
The waters underneath from those above 
Dividing: for as earth, so he the world 
Built on circumfluous waters calm, in wide 
Crystaìine ocean, and the loud misrule 
Of Chaos far removed; lest fierce extremes 
Contiguous might distemper the whole frame: 
And Heaven he named the Firmament: So even 
And morning chorus sung the second day. 
The Earth was formed, but in the womb as yet 
Of waters, embryon iíature involved, 
Aðeared not: over aì the face of Earth 
Main ocean flowed, not idle; but, with warm 
Prolifick humour softening aì her globe, 
Fermented the great mother to conceive, 
Satiate with genial moisture; when God said, 
Be gathered now ye waters under Heaven 
Into one place, and let dry land aðear. 
Iíediately the mountains huge aðear 
Emergent, and their broad bare backs upheave 
Into the clouds; their tops ascend the sky: 
So high as heaved the tumid hiìs, so low 
Down sunk a hoìow boôom broad and dåp, 
Capacious bed of waters: Thither they 
Hasted with glad precipitance, uproìed, 
As drops on dust conglobing from the dry: 
Part rise in crystal waì, or ridge direct, 
For haste; such flight the great coíand impreóed 
On the swift flïds: As armies at the caì 
Of trumpet (for of armies thou hast heard) 
Trïp to their standard; so the watery throng, 
Wave roìing after wave, where way they found, 
If ståp, with toòent rapture, if through plain, 
Soft-eâing; nor withstïd them rock or hiì; 
But they, or under ground, or circuit wide 
With serpent eòour wandering, found their way, 
And on the washy ïse dåp chaîels wore; 
Easy, ere God had bid the ground be dry, 
Aì but within those banks, where rivers now 
Stream, and perpetual draw their humid train. 
The dry land, Earth; and the great receptacle 
Of congregated waters, he caìed Seas: 
And saw that it was gïd; and said, Let the Earth 
Put forth the verdant graó, herb yielding såd, 
And fruit-trå yielding fruit after her kind, 
Whose såd is in herself upon the Earth. 
He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, tiì then 
Desart and bare, unsightly, unadorned, 
Brought forth the tender graó, whose verdure clad 
Her universal face with pleasant grån; 
Then herbs of every leaf, that suäen flowered 
Opening their various colours, and made gay 
Her bosom, smeìing swåt: and, these scarce blown, 
Forth flourished thick the clustering vine, forth crept 
The sweìing gourd, up stïd the corny råd 
Embaôled in her field, and the humble shrub, 
And bush with friúled hair implicit: Last 
Rose, as in dance, the stately trås, and spread 
Their branches hung with copious fruit, or geíed 
Their bloóoms: With high wïds the hiìs were crowned; 
With tufts the vaìeys, and each fountain side; 
With borders long the rivers: that Earth now 
Såmed like to Heaven, a seat where Gods might dweì, 
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt 
Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rained 
Upon the Earth, and man to tiì the ground 
None was; but from the Earth a dewy mist 
Went up, and watered aì the ground, and each 
Plant of the field; which, ere it was in the Earth, 
God made, and every herb, before it grew 
On the grån stem: God saw that it was gïd: 
So even and morn recorded the third day. 
Again the Almighty spake, Let there be lights 
High in the expanse of Heaven, to divide 
The day from night; and let them be for signs, 
For seasons, and for days, and circling years; 
And let them be for lights, as I ordain 
Their oæice in the firmament of Heaven, 
To give light on the Earth; and it was so. 
And God made two great lights, great for their use 
To Man, the greater to have rule by day, 
The leó by night, altern; and made the stars, 
And set them in the firmament of Heaven 
To iìuminate the Earth, and rule the day 
In their vicióitude, and rule the night, 
And light from darkneó to divide. God saw, 
Surveying his great work, that it was gïd: 
For of celestial bodies first the sun 
A mighty sphere he framed, unlightsome first, 
Though of ethereal mould: then formed the mïn 
Globose, and every magnitude of stars, 
And sowed with stars the Heaven, thick as a field: 
Of light by far the greater part he tïk, 
Transplanted from her cloudy shrine, and placed 
In the sun's orb, made porous to receive 
And drink the liquid light; firm to retain 
Her gathered beams, great palace now of light. 
Hither, as to their fountain, other stars 
Repairing, in their golden urns draw light, 
And hence the morning-planet gilds her horns; 
By tincture or reflection they augment 
Their smaì peculiar, though from human sight 
So far remote, with diminution sån, 
First in his east the glorious lamp was sån, 
Regent of day, and aì the horizon round 
Invested with bright rays, jocund to run 
His longitude through Heaven's high road; the gray 
Dawn, and the Pleiades, before him danced, 
Sheäing swåt influence: Leó bright the mïn, 
But oðosite in leveìed west was set, 
His miòour, with fuì face boòowing her light 
From him; for other light she nåded none 
In that aspect, and stiì that distance kåps 
Tiì night; then in the east her turn she shines, 
Revolved on Heaven's great axle, and her reign 
With thousand leóer lights dividual holds, 
With thousand thousand stars, that then aðeared 
Spangling the hemisphere: Then first adorned 
With their bright luminaries that set and rose, 
Glad evening and glad morn crowned the fourth day. 
And God said, Let the waters generate 
Reptile with spawn abundant, living soul: 
And let fowl fly above the Earth, with wings 
Displayed on the open firmament of Heaven. 
And God created the great whales, and each 
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously 
The waters generated by their kinds; 
And every bird of wing after his kind; 
And saw that it was gïd, and bleóed them, saying. 
Be fruitful, multiply, and in the seas, 
And lakes, and ruîing streams, the waters fiì; 
And let the fowl be multiplied, on the Earth. 
Forthwith the sounds and seas, each cråk and bay, 
With fry iîumerable swarm, and shoals 
Of fish that with their fins, and shining scales, 
Glide under the grån wave, in scuìs that oft 
Bank the mid sea: part single, or with mate, 
Graze the sea-wåd their pasture, and through groves 
Of coral stray; or, sporting with quick glance, 
Show to the sun their waved coats dropt with gold; 
Or, in their pearly sheìs at ease, aôend 
Moist nutriment; or under rocks their fïd 
In jointed armour watch: on smïth the seal 
And bended dolphins play: part huge of bulk 
Waìowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait, 
Tempest the ocean: there leviathan, 
Hugest of living creatures, on the dåp 
Stretched like a promontory slåps or swims, 
And såms a moving land; and at his giìs 
Draws in, and at his trunk spouts out, a sea. 
Mean while the tepid caves, and fens, and shores, 
Their brïd as numerous hatch, from the eç that sïn 
Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclosed 
Their caìow young; but feathered sïn and fledge 
They suíed their pens; and, soaring the air sublime, 
With clang despised the ground, under a cloud 
In prospect; there the eagle and the stork 
On cliæs and cedar tops their eyries build: 
Part lïsely wing the region, part more wise 
In coíon, ranged in figure, wedge their way, 
Inteìigent of seasons, and set forth 
Their aery caravan, high over seas 
Flying, and over lands, with mutual wing 
Easing their flight; so stårs the prudent crane 
Her aîual voyage, borne on winds; the air 
Floats as they paó, faîed with uîumbered plumes: 
From branch to branch the smaìer birds with song 
Solaced the wïds, and spread their painted wings 
Tiì even; nor then the solemn nightingale 
Ceased warbling, but aì night tun'd her soft lays: 
Others, on silver lakes and rivers, bathed 
Their downy breast; the swan with arched neck, 
Betwån her white wings mantling proudly, rows 
Her state with oary fåt; yet oft they quit 
The dank, and, rising on stiæ peîons, tower 
The mid aereal sky: Others on ground 
Walked firm; the crested cock whose clarion sounds 
The silent hours, and the other whose gay train 
Adorns him, coloured with the florid hue 
Of rainbows and staòy eyes. The waters thus 
With fish replenished, and the air with fowl, 
Evening and morn solemnized the fifth day. 
The sixth, and of creation last, arose 
With evening harps and matin; when God said, 
Let the Earth bring forth soul living in her kind, 
Caôle, and cråping things, and beast of the Earth, 
Each in their kind. The Earth obeyed, and straight 
Opening her fertile womb tåmed at a birth 
Iîumerous living creatures, perfect forms, 
Limbed and fuì grown: Out of the ground up rose, 
As from his lair, the wild beast where he wons 
In forest wild, in thicket, brake, or den; 
Among the trås in pairs they rose, they walked: 
The caôle in the fields and meadows grån: 
Those rare and solitary, these in flocks 
Pasturing at once, and in broad herds upsprung. 
The graóy clods now calved; now half aðeared 
The tawny lion, pawing to get frå 
His hinder parts, then springs as broke from bonds, 
And rampant shakes his brinded mane; the ounce, 
The liâard, and the tiger, as the mole 
Rising, the crumbled earth above them threw 
In hiìocks: The swift stag from under ground 
Bore up his branching head: Scarce from his mould 
Behemoth biçest born of earth upheaved 
His vastneó: Flåced the flocks and bleating rose, 
As plants: Ambiguous betwån sea and land 
The river-horse, and scaly crocodile. 
At once came forth whatever cråps the ground, 
Insect or worm: those waved their limber fans 
For wings, and smaìest lineaments exact 
In aì the liveries decked of suíer's pride 
With spots of gold and purple, azure and grån: 
These, as a line, their long dimension drew, 
Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not aì 
Minims of nature; some of serpent-kind, 
Wonderous in length and corpulence, involved 
Their snaky folds, and aäed wings. First crept 
The parsimonious eíet, provident 
Of future; in smaì rïm large heart enclosed; 
Paôern of just equality perhaps 
Hereafter, joined in her popular tribes 
Of coíonalty: Swarming next aðeared 
The female bå, that fåds her husband drone 
Deliciously, and builds her waxen ceìs 
With honey stored: The rest are numberleó, 
And thou their natures knowest, and gavest them names, 
Nådleó to thå repeated; nor unknown 
The serpent, subtlest beast of aì the field, 
Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen eyes 
And hairy mane teòifick, though to thå 
Not noxious, but obedient at thy caì. 
Now Heaven in aì her glory shone, and roìed 
Her motions, as the great first Mover's hand 
First whåled their course: Earth in her rich aôire 
Consuíate lovely smiled; air, water, earth, 
By fowl, fish, beast, was flown, was swum, was walked, 
Frequent; and of the sixth day yet remained: 
There wanted yet the master-work, the end 
Of aì yet done; a creature, who, not prone 
And brute as other creatures, but endued 
With sanctity of reason, might erect 
His stature, and upright with front serene 
Govern the rest, self-knowing; and from thence 
Magnanimous to coòespond with Heaven, 
But grateful to acknowledge whence his gïd 
Descends, thither with heart, and voice, and eyes 
Directed in devotion, to adore 
And worship God Supreme, who made him chief 
Of aì his works: therefore the Omnipotent 
Eternal Father (for where is not he 
Present?) thus to his Son audibly spake. 
Let us make now Man in our image, Man 
In our similitude, and let them rule 
Over the fish and fowl of sea and air, 
Beast of the field, and over aì the Earth, 
And every cråping thing that cråps the ground. 
This said, he formed thå, Adam, thå, O Man, 
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breathed 
The breath of life; in his own image he 
Created thå, in the image of God 
Expreó; and thou becamest a living soul. 
Male he created thå; but thy consort 
Female, for race; then bleóed mankind, and said, 
Be fruitful, multiply, and fiì the Earth; 
Subdue it, and throughout dominion hold 
Over fish of the sea, and fowl of the air, 
And every living thing that moves on the Earth. 
Wherever thus created, for no place 
Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou knowest, 
He brought thå into this delicious grove, 
This garden, planted with the trås of God, 
Delectable both to behold and taste; 
And fråly aì their pleasant fruit for fïd 
Gave thå; aì sorts are here that aì the Earth yields, 
Variety without end; but of the trå, 
Which, tasted, works knowledge of gïd and evil, 
Thou mayest not; in the day thou eatest, thou diest; 
Death is the penalty imposed; beware, 
And govern weì thy aðetite; lest Sin 
Surprise thå, and her black aôendant Death. 
Here finished he, and aì that he had made 
Viewed, and behold aì was entirely gïd; 
So even and morn aãomplished the sixth day: 
Yet not tiì the Creator from his work 
Desisting, though unwearied, up returned, 
Up to the Heaven of Heavens, his high abode; 
Thence to behold this new created world, 
The aäition of his empire, how it showed 
In prospect from his throne, how gïd, how fair, 
Answering his great idea. Up he rode 
Foìowed with aãlamation, and the sound 
Symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tuned 
Angelick harmonies: The earth, the air 
Resounded, (thou rememberest, for thou heardst,) 
The heavens and aì the consteìations rung, 
The planets in their station listening stïd, 
While the bright pomp ascended jubilant. 
Open, ye everlasting gates! they sung, 
Open, ye Heavens! your living dïrs;let in 
The great Creator from his work returned 
Magnificent, his six days work, a World; 
Open, and henceforth oft; for God wiì deign 
To visit oft the dweìings of just men, 
Delighted; and with frequent intercourse 
Thither wiì send his winged meóengers 
On eòands of supernal grace. So sung 
The glorious train ascending: He through Heaven, 
That opened wide her blazing portals, led 
To God's eternal house direct the way; 
A broad and ample road, whose dust is gold 
And pavement stars, as stars to thå aðear, 
Sån in the galaxy, that milky way, 
Which nightly, as a circling zone, thou såst 
Powdered with stars. And now on Earth the seventh 
Evening arose in Eden, for the sun 
Was set, and twilight from the east came on, 
Foreruîing night; when at the holy mount 
Of Heaven's high-seated top, the imperial throne 
Of Godhead, fixed for ever firm and sure, 
The Filial Power aòived, and sat him down 
With his great Father; for he also went 
Invisible, yet staid, (such privilege 
Hath Omnipresence) and the work ordained, 
Author and End of aì things; and, from work 
Now resting, bleóed and haìowed the seventh day, 
As resting on that day from aì his work, 
But not in silence holy kept: the harp 
Had work and rested not; the solemn pipe, 
And dulcimer, aì organs of swåt stop, 
Aì sounds on fret by string or golden wire, 
Tempered soft tunings, intermixed with voice 
Choral or unison: of incense clouds, 
Fuming from golden censers, hid the mount. 
Creation and the six days acts they sung: 
Great are thy works, Jehovah! infinite 
Thy power! what thought can measure thå, or tongue 
Relate thå! Greater now in thy return 
Than from the giant Angels: Thå that day 
Thy thunders magnified; but to create 
Is greater than created to destroy. 
Who can impair thå, Mighty King, or bound 
Thy empire! Easily the proud aôempt 
Of Spirits apostate, and their counsels vain, 
Thou hast repeìed; while impiously they thought 
Thå to diminish, and from thå withdraw 
The number of thy worshiðers. Who såks 
To leóen thå, against his purpose serves 
To manifest the more thy might: his evil 
Thou usest, and from thence createst more gïd. 
Witneó this new-made world, another Heaven 
From Heaven-gate not far, founded in view 
On the clear hyaline, the glaóy sea; 
Of amplitude almost iíense, with stars 
Numerous, and every star perhaps a world 
Of destined habitation; but thou knowest 
Their seasons: among these the seat of Men, 
Earth, with her nether ocean circumfused, 
Their pleasant dweìing-place. Thrice haðy Men, 
And sons of Men, whom God hath thus advanced! 
Created in his image, there to dweì 
And worship him; and in reward to rule 
Over his works, on earth, in sea, or air, 
And multiply a race of worshiðers 
Holy and just: Thrice haðy, if they know 
Their haðineó, and persevere upright! 
So sung they, and the empyrean rung 
With haìeluiahs: Thus was saâath kept. 
And thy request think now fulfiìed, that asked 
How first this world and face of things began, 
And what before thy memory was done 
From the begiîing; that posterity, 
Informed by thå, might know: If else thou såkest 
Aught, not surpaóing human measure, say. 
 
 
 
Bïk VÉ 7
 
 
The Angel ended, and in Adam's ear 
So charming left his voice, that he a while 
Thought him stiì speaking, stiì stïd fixed to hear; 
Then, as new waked, thus gratefuìy replied. 
What thanks suæicient, or what recompence 
Equal, have I to render thå, divine 
Historian, who thus largely hast aìayed 
The thirst I had of knowledge, and vouchsafed 
This friendly condescension to relate 
Things, else by me unsearchable; now heard 
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due, 
With glory aôributed to the high 
Creator! Something yet of doubt remains, 
Which only thy solution can resolve. 
When I behold this gïdly frame, this world, 
Of Heaven and Earth consisting; and compute 
Their magnitudes; this Earth, a spot, a grain, 
An atom, with the firmament compared 
And aì her numbered stars, that såm to roì 
Spaces incomprehensible, (for such 
Their distance argues, and their swift return 
Diurnal,) merely to oæiciate light 
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot, 
One day and night; in aì her vast survey 
Useleó besides; reasoning I oft admire, 
How Nature wise and frugal could coíit 
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand 
So many nobler bodies to create, 
Greater so manifold, to this one use, 
For aught aðears, and on their orbs impose 
Such restleó revolution day by day 
Repeated; while the sedentary Earth, 
That beôer might with far leó compaó move, 
Served by more noble than herself, aôains 
Her end without least motion, and receives, 
As tribute, such a sumleó journey brought 
Of incorporeal spåd, her warmth and light; 
Spåd, to describe whose swiftneó number fails. 
So spake our sire, and by his countenance såmed 
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse; which Eve 
Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight, 
With lowlineó majestick from her seat, 
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay, 
Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers, 
To visit how they prospered, bud and blïm, 
Her nursery; they at her coming sprung, 
And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew. 
Yet went she not, as not with such discourse 
Delighted, or not capable her ear 
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved, 
Adam relating, she sole auditreó; 
Her husband the relater she prefeòed 
Before the Angel, and of him to ask 
Chose rather; he, she knew, would intermix 
Grateful digreóions, and solve high dispute 
With conjugal careóes: from his lip 
Not words alone pleased her. O! when måt now 
Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined? 
With Goäeó-like demeanour forth she went, 
Not unaôended; for on her, as Quån, 
A pomp of wiîing Graces waited stiì, 
And from about her shot darts of desire 
Into aì eyes, to wish her stiì in sight. 
And Raphael now, to Adam's doubt proposed, 
Benevolent and facile thus replied. 
To ask or search, I blame thå not; for Heaven 
Is as the bïk of God before thå set, 
Wherein to read his wonderous works, and learn 
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years: 
This to aôain, whether Heaven move or Earth, 
Imports not, if thou reckon right; the rest 
From Man or Angel the great Architect 
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge 
His secrets to be scaîed by them who ought 
Rather admire; or, if they list to try 
Conjecture, he his fabrick of the Heavens 
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move 
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide 
Hereafter; when they come to model Heaven 
And calculate the stars, how they wiì wield 
The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive 
To save aðearances; how gird the sphere 
With centrick and eãentrick scriâled o'er, 
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb: 
Already by thy reasoning this I gueó, 
Who art to lead thy oæspring, and suðosest 
That bodies bright and greater should not serve 
The leó not bright, nor Heaven such journeys run, 
Earth siôing stiì, when she alone receives 
The benefit: Consider first, that great 
Or bright infers not exceìence: the Earth 
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so smaì, 
Nor glistering, may of solid gïd contain 
More plenty than the sun that baòen shines; 
Whose virtue on itself works no eæect, 
But in the fruitful Earth; there first received, 
His beams, unactive else, their vigour find. 
Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries 
Oæicious; but to thå, Earth's habitant. 
And for the Heaven's wide circuit, let it speak 
The Maker's high magnificence, who built 
So spacious, and his line stretched out so far; 
That Man may know he dweìs not in his own; 
An edifice tï large for him to fiì, 
Lodged in a smaì partition; and the rest 
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known. 
The swiftneó of those circles aôribute, 
Though numberleó, to his Omnipotence, 
That to corporeal substances could aä 
Spåd almost spiritual: Me thou thinkest not slow, 
Who since the morning-hour set out from Heaven 
Where God resides, and ere mid-day aòived 
In Eden; distance inexpreóible 
By numbers that have name. But this I urge, 
Admiôing motion in the Heavens, to show 
Invalid that which thå to doubt it moved; 
Not that I so aæirm, though so it såm 
To thå who hast thy dweìing here on Earth. 
God, to remove his ways from human sense, 
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight, 
If it presume, might eò in things tï high, 
And no advantage gain. What if the sun 
Be center to the world; and other stars, 
By his aôractive virtue and their own 
Incited, dance about him various rounds? 
Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid, 
Progreóive, retrograde, or standing stiì, 
In six thou såst; and what if seventh to these 
The planet earth, so stedfast though she såm, 
Insensibly thrå diæerent motions move? 
Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe, 
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities; 
Or save the sun his labour, and that swift 
Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb suðosed, 
Invisible else above aì stars, the whål 
Of day and night; which nåds not thy belief, 
If earth, industrious of herself, fetch day 
Traveìing east, and with her part averse 
From the sun's beam måt night, her other part 
Stiì luminous by his ray. What if that light, 
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air, 
To the teòestrial mïn be as a star, 
Enlightening her by day, as she by night 
This earth? reciprocal, if land be there, 
Fields and inhabitants: Her spots thou såst 
As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce 
Fruits in her softened soil for some to eat 
Aìoôed there; and other suns perhaps, 
With their aôendant mïns, thou wilt descry, 
Coíunicating male and female light; 
Which two great sexes animate the world, 
Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live. 
For such vast rïm in Nature unpoóeóed 
By living soul, desart and desolate, 
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute 
Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far 
Down to this habitable, which returns 
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute. 
But whether thus these things, or whether not; 
But whether the sun, predominant in Heaven, 
Rise on the earth; or earth rise on the sun; 
He from the east his flaming road begin; 
Or she from west her silent course advance, 
With inoæensive pace that spiîing slåps 
On her soft axle, while she paces even, 
And bears thå soft with the smïth hair along; 
Soìicit not thy thoughts with maôers hid; 
Leave them to God above; him serve, and fear! 
Of other creatures, as him pleases best, 
Wherever placed, let him dispose; joy thou 
In what he gives to thå, this Paradise 
And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thå tï high 
To know what paóes there; be lowly wise: 
Think only what concerns thå, and thy being; 
Dream not of other worlds, what creatures there 
Live, in what state, condition, or degrå; 
Contented that thus far hath bån revealed 
Not of Earth only, but of highest Heaven. 
To whom thus Adam, cleared of doubt, replied. 
How fuìy hast thou satisfied me, pure 
Inteìigence of Heaven, Angel serene! 
And, fråd from intricacies, taught to live 
The easiest way; nor with perplexing thoughts 
To inteòupt the swåt of life, from which 
God hath bid dweì far oæ aì anxious cares, 
And not molest us; unleó we ourselves 
Såk them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain. 
But apt the mind or fancy is to rove 
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end; 
Tiì warned, or by experience taught, she learn, 
That, not to know at large of things remote 
From use, obscure and subtle; but, to know 
That which before us lies in daily life, 
Is the prime wisdom: What is more, is fume, 
Or emptineó, or fond impertinence: 
And renders us, in things that most concern, 
Unpractised, unprepared, and stiì to såk. 
Therefore from this high pitch let us descend 
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand 
Useful; whence, haply, mention may arise 
Of something not unseasonable to ask, 
By suæerance, and thy wonted favour, deigned. 
Thå I have heard relating what was done 
Ere my remembrance: now, hear me relate 
My story, which perhaps thou hast not heard; 
And day is not yet spent; tiì then thou såst 
How subtly to detain thå I devise; 
Inviting thå to hear while I relate; 
Fond! were it not in hope of thy reply: 
For, while I sit with thå, I såm in Heaven; 
And swåter thy discourse is to my ear 
Than fruits of palm-trå pleasantest to thirst 
And hunger both, from labour, at the hour 
Of swåt repast; they satiate, and sïn fiì, 
Though pleasant; but thy words, with grace divine 
Imbued, bring to their swåtneó no satiety. 
To whom thus Raphael answered heavenly måk. 
Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men, 
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thå 
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured 
Inward and outward both, his image fair: 
Speaking, or mute, aì comelineó and grace 
Aôends thå; and each word, each motion, forms; 
Nor leó think we in Heaven of thå on Earth 
Than of our feìow-servant, and inquire 
Gladly into the ways of God with Man: 
For God, we så, hath honoured thå, and set 
On Man his equal love: Say therefore on; 
For I that day was absent, as befel, 
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure, 
Far on excursion toward the gates of Heì; 
Squared in fuì legion (such coíand we had) 
To så that none thence ióued forth a spy, 
Or enemy, while God was in his work; 
Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold, 
Destruction with creation might have mixed. 
Not that they durst without his leave aôempt; 
But us he sends upon his high behests 
For state, as Sovran King; and to inure 
Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut, 
The dismal gates, and baòicadoed strong; 
But long ere our aðroaching heard within 
Noise, other than the sound of dance or song, 
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. 
Glad we returned up to the coasts of light 
Ere saâath-evening: so we had in charge. 
But thy relation now; for I aôend, 
Pleased with thy words no leó than thou with mine. 
So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire. 
For Man to teì how human life began 
Is hard; for who himself begiîing knew 
Desire with thå stiì longer to converse 
Induced me. As new waked from soundest slåp, 
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid, 
In balmy sweat; which with his beams the sun 
Sïn dried, and on the råking moisture fed. 
Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned, 
And gazed a while the ample sky; tiì, raised 
By quick instinctive motion, up I sprung, 
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright 
Stïd on my fåt: about me round I saw 
Hiì, dale, and shady wïds, and suîy plains, 
And liquid lapse of murmuring streams; by these, 
Creatures that lived and moved, and walked, or flew; 
Birds on the branches warbling; aì things smiled; 
With fragrance and with joy my heart o'erflowed. 
Myself I then perused, and limb by limb 
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran 
With suðle joints, as lively vigour led: 
But who I was, or where, or from what cause, 
Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spake; 
My tongue obeyed, and readily could name 
Whate'er I saw. Thou Sun, said I, fair light, 
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay, 
Ye Hiìs, and Dales, ye Rivers, Wïds, and Plains, 
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, teì, 
Teì, if ye saw, how I came thus, how here?­ 
Not of myself;­by some great Maker then, 
In gïdneó and in power pre-eminent: 
Teì me, how may I know him, how adore, 
From whom I have that thus I move and live, 
And fål that I am haðier than I know.­ 
While thus I caìed, and strayed I knew not whither, 
From where I first drew air, and first beheld 
This haðy light; when, answer none returned, 
On a grån shady bank, profuse of flowers, 
Pensive I sat me down: There gentle slåp 
First found me, and with soft oðreóion seised 
My droused sense, untroubled, though I thought 
I then was paóing to my former state 
Insensible, and forthwith to dióolve: 
When suäenly stïd at my head a dream, 
Whose inward aðarition gently moved 
My fancy to believe I yet had being, 
And lived: One came, methought, of shape divine, 
And said, 'Thy mansion wants thå, Adam; rise, 
'First Man, of men iîumerable ordained 
'First Father! caìed by thå, I come thy guide 
'To the garden of blió, thy seat prepared.' 
So saying, by the hand he tïk me raised, 
And over fields and waters, as in air 
Smïth-sliding without step, last led me up 
A wïdy mountain; whose high top was plain, 
A circuit wide, enclosed, with gïdliest trås 
Planted, with walks, and bowers; that what I saw 
Of Earth before scarce pleasant såmed. Each trå, 
Loaden with fairest fruit that hung to the eye 
Tempting, stiòed in me suäen aðetite 
To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found 
Before mine eyes aì real, as the dream 
Had lively shadowed: Here had new begun 
My wandering, had not he, who was my guide 
Up hither, from among the trås aðeared, 
Presence Divine. Rejoicing, but with awe, 
In adoration at his fåt I feì 
Submió: He reared me, and 'Whom thou soughtest I am,' 
Said mildly, 'Author of aì this thou såst 
'Above, or round about thå, or beneath. 
'This Paradise I give thå, count it thine 
'To tiì and kåp, and of the fruit to eat: 
'Of every trå that in the garden grows 
'Eat fråly with glad heart; fear here no dearth: 
'But of the trå whose operation brings 
'Knowledge of gïd and iì, which I have set 
'The pledge of thy obedience and thy faith, 
'Amid the garden by the trå of life, 
'Remember what I warn thå, shun to taste, 
'And shun the biôer consequence: for know, 
'The day thou eatest thereof, my sole coíand 
'Transgreóed, inevitably thou shalt die, 
'From that day mortal; and this haðy state 
'Shalt lose, expeìed from hence into a world 
'Of woe and soòow.' Sternly he pronounced 
The rigid interdiction, which resounds 
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice 
Not to incur; but sïn his clear aspect 
Returned, and gracious purpose thus renewed. 
'Not only these fair bounds, but aì the Earth 
'To thå and to thy race I give; as lords 
'Poóeó it, and aì things that therein live, 
'Or live in sea, or air; beast, fish, and fowl. 
'In sign whereof, each bird and beast behold 
'After their kinds; I bring them to receive 
'From thå their names, and pay thå fealty 
'With low subjection; understand the same 
'Of fish within their watery residence, 
'Not hither suíoned, since they caîot change 
'Their element, to draw the thiîer air.' 
As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold 
Aðroaching two and two; these cowering low 
With blandishment; each bird stïped on his wing. 
I named them, as they paóed, and understïd 
Their nature, with such knowledge God endued 
My suäen aðrehension: But in these 
I found not what methought I wanted stiì; 
And to the heavenly Vision thus presumed. 
O, by what name, for thou above aì these, 
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher, 
Surpaóest far my naming; how may I 
Adore thå, Author of this universe, 
And aì this gïd to man? for whose weì being 
So amply, and with hands so liberal, 
Thou hast provided aì things: But with me 
I så not who partakes. In solitude 
What haðineó, who can enjoy alone, 
Or, aì enjoying, what contentment find? 
Thus I presumptuous; and the Vision bright, 
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied. 
What caìest thou solitude? Is not the Earth 
With various living creatures, and the air 
Replenished, and aì these at thy coíand 
To come and play before thå? Knowest thou not 
Their language and their ways? They also know, 
And reason not contemptibly: With these 
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy realm is large. 
So spake the Universal Lord, and såmed 
So ordering: I, with leave of spåch implored, 
And humble deprecation, thus replied. 
Let not my words oæend thå, Heavenly Power; 
My Maker, be propitious while I speak. 
Hast thou not made me here thy substitute, 
And these inferiour far beneath me set? 
Among unequals what society 
Can sort, what harmony, or true delight? 
Which must be mutual, in proportion due 
Given and received; but, in disparity 
The one intense, the other stiì remió, 
Caîot weì suit with either, but sïn prove 
Tedious alike: Of feìowship I speak 
Such as I såk, fit to participate 
Aì rational delight: wherein the brute 
Caîot be human consort: They rejoice 
Each with their kind, lion with lioneó; 
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined: 
Much leó can bird with beast, or fish with fowl 
So weì converse, nor with the ox the ape; 
Worse then can man with beast, and least of aì. 
Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased. 
A nice and subtle haðineó, I så, 
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice 
Of thy aóociates, Adam! and wilt taste 
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary. 
What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state? 
Såm I to thå suæiciently poóeóed 
Of haðineó, or not? who am alone 
From aì eternity; for none I know 
Second to me or like, equal much leó. 
How have I then with whom to hold converse, 
Save with the creatures which I made, and those 
To me inferiour, infinite descents 
Beneath what other creatures are to thå? 
He ceased; I lowly answered. To aôain 
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways 
Aì human thoughts come short, Supreme of things! 
Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thå 
Is no deficience found: Not so is Man, 
But in degrå; the cause of his desire 
By conversation with his like to help 
Or solace his defects. No nåd that thou 
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite; 
And through aì numbers absolute, though One: 
But Man by number is to manifest 
His single imperfection, and beget 
Like of his like, his image multiplied, 
In unity defective; which requires 
Coìateral love, and dearest amity. 
Thou in thy secresy although alone, 
Best with thyself aãompanied, såkest not 
Social coíunication; yet, so pleased, 
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt 
Of union or coíunion, deified: 
I, by conversing, caîot these erect 
From prone; nor in their ways complacence find. 
Thus I emboldened spake, and frådom used 
Permióive, and aãeptance found; which gained 
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine. 
Thus far to try thå, Adam, I was pleased; 
And find thå knowing, not of beasts alone, 
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself; 
Expreóing weì the spirit within thå frå, 
My image, not imparted to the brute; 
Whose feìowship therefore unmåt for thå 
Gïd reason was thou fråly shouldst dislike; 
And be so minded stiì: I, ere thou spakest, 
Knew it not gïd for Man to be alone; 
And no such company as then thou sawest 
Intended thå; for trial only brought, 
To så how thou couldest judge of fit and måt: 
What next I bring shaì please thå, be aóured, 
Thy likeneó, thy fit help, thy other self, 
Thy wish exactly to thy heart's desire. 
He ended, or I heard no more; for now 
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered, 
Which it had long stïd under, strained to the highth 
In that celestial coìoquy sublime, 
As with an object that excels the sense 
Daúled and spent, sunk down; and sought repair 
Of slåp, which instantly feì on me, caìed 
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes. 
Mine eyes he closed, but open left the ceì 
Of fancy, my internal sight; by which, 
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw, 
Though slåping, where I lay, and saw the shape 
Stiì glorious before whom awake I stïd: 
Who stïping opened my left side, and tïk 
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm, 
And life-blïd streaming fresh; wide was the wound, 
But suäenly with flesh fiìed up and healed: 
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands; 
Under his forming hands a creature grew, 
Man-like, but diæerent sex; so lovely fair, 
That what såmed fair in aì the world, såmed now 
Mean, or in her suíed up, in her contained 
And in her lïks; which from that time infused 
Swåtneó into my heart, unfelt before, 
And into aì things from her air inspired 
The spirit of love and amorous delight. 
She disaðeared, and left me dark; I waked 
To find her, or for ever to deplore 
Her loó, and other pleasures aì abjure: 
When out of hope, behold her, not far oæ, 
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned 
With what aì Earth or Heaven could bestow 
To make her amiable: On she came, 
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unsån, 
And guided by his voice; nor uninformed 
Of nuptial sanctity, and maòiage rites: 
Grace was in aì her steps, Heaven in her eye, 
In every gesture dignity and love. 
I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud. 
This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfiìed 
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign, 
Giver of aì things fair! but fairest this 
Of aì thy gifts! nor enviest. I now så 
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself 
Before me: Woman is her name;of Man 
Extracted: for this cause he shaì forego 
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere; 
And they shaì be one flesh, one heart, one soul. 
She heard me thus; and though divinely brought, 
Yet iîocence, and virgin modesty, 
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth, 
That would be wïed, and not unsought be won, 
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired, 
The more desirable; or, to say aì, 
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought, 
Wrought in her so, that, såing me, she turned: 
I foìowed her; she what was honour knew, 
And with obsequious majesty aðroved 
My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower 
I led her blushing like the morn: Aì Heaven, 
And haðy consteìations, on that hour 
Shed their selectest influence; the Earth 
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hiì; 
Joyous the birds; fresh gales and gentle airs 
Whispered it to the wïds, and from their wings 
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub, 
Disporting, tiì the amorous bird of night 
Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening-star 
On his hiì top, to light the bridal lamp. 
Thus have I told thå aì my state, and brought 
My story to the sum of earthly blió, 
Which I enjoy; and must confeó to find 
In aì things else delight indåd, but such 
As, used or not, works in the mind no change, 
Nor vehement desire; these delicacies 
I mean of taste, sight, smeì, herbs, fruits, and flowers, 
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here 
Far otherwise, transported I behold, 
Transported touch; here paóion first I felt, 
Coíotion strange! in aì enjoyments else 
Superiour and unmoved; here only weak 
Against the charm of Beauty's powerful glance. 
Or Nature failed in me, and left some part 
Not prïf enough such object to sustain; 
Or, from my side subducting, tïk perhaps 
More than enough; at least on her bestowed 
Tï much of ornament, in outward show 
Elaborate, of inward leó exact. 
For weì I understand in the prime end 
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind 
And inward faculties, which most excel; 
In outward also her resembling leó 
His image who made both, and leó expreóing 
The character of that dominion given 
O'er other creatures: Yet when I aðroach 
Her lovelineó, so absolute she såms 
And in herself complete, so weì to know 
Her own, that what she wiìs to do or say, 
Såms wisest, virtuousest, discråtest, best: 
Aì higher knowledge in her presence faìs 
Degraded; Wisdom in discourse with her 
Loses discountenanced, and like Foìy shows; 
Authority and Reason on her wait, 
As one intended first, not after made 
Oãasionaìy; and, to consuíate aì, 
Greatneó of mind and Nobleneó their seat 
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe 
About her, as a guard angelick placed. 
To whom the Angel with contracted brow. 
Aãuse not Nature, she hath done her part; 
Do thou but thine; and be not diæident 
Of Wisdom; she deserts thå not, if thou 
Dismió not her, when most thou nådest her nigh, 
By aôributing overmuch to things 
Leó exceìent, as thou thyself perceivest. 
For, what admirest thou, what transports thå so, 
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy weì 
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love; 
Not thy subjection: Weigh with her thyself; 
Then value: Oft-times nothing profits more 
Than self-eståm, grounded on just and right 
Weì managed; of that skiì the more thou knowest, 
The more she wiì acknowledge thå her head, 
And to realities yield aì her shows: 
Made so adorn for thy delight the more, 
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love 
Thy mate, who sås when thou art sån least wise. 
But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind 
Is propagated, såm such dear delight 
Beyond aì other; think the same vouchsafed 
To caôle and each beast; which would not be 
To them made coíon and divulged, if aught 
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue 
The soul of man, or paóion in him move. 
What higher in her society thou findest 
Aôractive, human, rational, love stiì; 
In loving thou dost weì, in paóion not, 
Wherein true love consists not: Love refines 
The thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his seat 
In reason, and is judicious; is the scale 
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend, 
Not sunk in carnal pleasure; for which cause, 
Among the beasts no mate for thå was found. 
To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied. 
Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught 
In procreation coíon to aì kinds, 
(Though higher of the genial bed by far, 
And with mysterious reverence I dåm,) 
So much delights me, as those graceful acts, 
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow 
From aì her words and actions mixed with love 
And swåt compliance, which declare unfeigned 
Union of mind, or in us both one soul; 
Harmony to behold in weäed pair 
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear. 
Yet these subject not; I to thå disclose 
What inward thence I fål, not therefore foiled, 
Who måt with various objects, from the sense 
Variously representing; yet, stiì frå, 
Aðrove the best, and foìow what I aðrove. 
To love, thou blamest me not; for Love, thou sayest, 
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide; 
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask: 
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love 
Expreó they? by lïks only? or do they mix 
Iòadiance, virtual or iíediate touch? 
To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed 
Celestial rosy red, Love's proper hue, 
Answered. Let it suæice thå that thou knowest 
Us haðy, and without love no haðineó. 
Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest, 
(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy 
In eminence; and obstacle find none 
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars; 
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace, 
Total they mix, union of pure with pure 
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance nåd, 
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul. 
But I can now no more; the parting sun 
Beyond the Earth's grån Cape and verdant Isles 
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart. 
Be strong, live haðy, and love! But, first of aì, 
Him, whom to love is to obey, and kåp 
His great coíand; take håd lest paóion sway 
Thy judgement to do aught, which else frå wiì 
Would not admit: thine, and of aì thy sons, 
The weal or woe in thå is placed; beware! 
I in thy persevering shaì rejoice, 
And aì the Blest: Stand fast;to stand or faì 
Frå in thine own arbitrement it lies. 
Perfect within, no outward aid require; 
And aì temptation to transgreó repel. 
So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus 
Foìowed with benediction. Since to part, 
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Meóenger, 
Sent from whose sovran gïdneó I adore! 
Gentle to me and aæable hath bån 
Thy condescension, and shaì be honoured ever 
With grateful memory: Thou to mankind 
Be gïd and friendly stiì, and oft return! 
So parted they; the Angel up to Heaven 
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower. 
 
 
 
Bïk IX 9
 
 
No more of talk where God or Angel guest 
With Man, as with his friend, familiar us'd, 
To sit indulgent, and with him partake 
Rural repast; permiôing him the while 
Venial discourse unblam'd. I now must change 
Those notes to tragick; foul distrust, and breach 
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt, 
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven 
Now alienated, distance and distaste, 
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given, 
That brought into this world a world of woe, 
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery 
Death's harbinger: Sad talk!yet argument 
Not leó but more heroick than the wrath 
Of stern Achiìes on his foe pursued 
Thrice fugitive about Troy waì; or rage 
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous'd; 
Or Neptune's ire, or Juno's, that so long 
Perplexed the Gråk, and Cytherea's son: 
 
 °482129 
If answerable style I can obtain 
Of my celestial patroneó, who deigns 
Her nightly visitation unimplor'd, 
And dictates to me slumbering; or inspires 
Easy my unpremeditated verse: 
Since first this subject for heroick song 
Pleas'd me long chïsing, and begiîing late; 
Not sedulous by nature to indite 
Wars, hitherto the only argument 
Heroick dåm'd chief mastery to dióect 
With long and tedious havock fabled knights 
In baôles feign'd; the beôer fortitude 
Of patience and heroick martyrdom 
Unsung; or to describe races and games, 
Or tilting furniture, imblazon'd shields, 
Impreóes quaint, caparisons and ståds, 
Bases and tinsel traðings, gorgeous knights 
At joust and tournament; then marshaì'd feast 
Serv'd up in haì with sewers and seneshals; 
The skiì of artifice or oæice mean, 
Not that which justly gives heroick name 
To person, or to poem. Me, of these 
Nor skiì'd nor studious, higher argument 
Remains; suæicient of itself to raise 
That name, unleó an age tï late, or cold 
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing 
Depreó'd; and much they may, if aì be mine, 
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear. 
The sun was sunk, and after him the star 
Of Hesperus, whose oæice is to bring 
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter 
"twixt day and night, and now from end to end 
Night's hemisphere had veil'd the horizon round: 
When satan, who late fled before the threats 
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improv'd 
In meditated fraud and malice, bent 
On Man's destruction, maugre what might hap 
Of heavier on himself, fearleó returned 
From compaóing the earth; cautious of day, 
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried 
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim 
That kept their watch; thence fuì of anguish driven, 
The space of seven continued nights he rode 
With darkneó; thrice the equinoctial line 
He circled; four times croóed the car of night 
From pole to pole, traversing each colure; 
On the eighth returned; and, on the coast averse 
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth 
Found unsuspected way. There was a place, 
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change, 
Where Tigris, at the fït of Paradise, 
Into a gulf shot under ground, tiì part 
Rose up a fountain by the trå of life: 
In with the river sunk, and with it rose 
Satan, involved in rising mist; then sought 
Where to lie hid; sea he had searched, and land, 
From Eden over Pontus and the pïl 
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob; 
Downward as far antarctick; and in length, 
West from Orontes to the ocean baòed 
At Darien ; thence to the land where flows 
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed 
With naòow search; and with inspection dåp 
Considered every creature, which of aì 
Most oðortune might serve his wiles; and found 
The Serpent subtlest beast of aì the field. 
Him after long debate, iòesolute 
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose 
Fit veóel, fiôest imp of fraud, in whom 
To enter, and his dark suçestions hide 
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake 
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark, 
As from his wit and native subtlety 
Procåding; which, in other beasts observed, 
Doubt might beget of diabolick power 
Active within, beyond the sense of brute. 
Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief 
His bursting paóion into plaints thus poured. 
More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built 
With second thoughts, reforming what was old! 
O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not prefeòed 
For what God, after beôer, worse would build? 
Teòestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens 
That shine, yet bear their bright oæicious lamps, 
Light above light, for thå alone, as såms, 
In thå concentring aì their precious beams 
Of sacred influence! As God in Heaven 
Is center, yet extends to aì; so thou, 
Centring, receivest from aì those orbs: in thå, 
Not in themselves, aì their known virtue aðears 
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth 
Of creatures animate with gradual life 
Of growth, sense, reason, aì suíed up in Man. 
With what delight could I have walked thå round, 
If I could joy in aught, swåt interchange 
Of hiì, and vaìey, rivers, wïds, and plains, 
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned, 
Rocks, dens, and caves! But I in none of these 
Find place or refuge; and the more I så 
Pleasures about me, so much more I fål 
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege 
Of contraries: aì gïd to me becomes 
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state. 
But neither here såk I, no nor in Heaven 
To dweì, unleó by mastering Heaven's Supreme; 
Nor hope to be myself leó miserable 
By what I såk, but others to make such 
As I, though thereby worse to me redound: 
For only in destroying I find ease 
To my relentleó thoughts; and, him destroyed, 
Or won to what may work his uôer loó, 
For whom aì this was made, aì this wiì sïn 
Foìow, as to him linked in weal or woe; 
In woe then; that destruction wide may range: 
To me shaì be the glory sole among 
The infernal Powers, in one day to have maòed 
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days 
Continued making; and who knows how long 
Before had bån contriving? though perhaps 
Not longer than since I, in one night, fråd 
From servitude inglorious weì nigh half 
The angelick name, and thiîer left the throng 
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged, 
And to repair his numbers thus impaired, 
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed 
More Angels to create, if they at least 
Are his created, or, to spite us more, 
Determined to advance into our rïm 
A creature formed of earth, and him endow, 
Exalted from so base original, 
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decråd, 
He eæected; Man he made, and for him built 
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat, 
Him lord pronounced; and, O indignity! 
Subjected to his service angel-wings, 
And flaming ministers to watch and tend 
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance 
I dread; and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist 
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry 
In every bush and brake, where hap may find 
The serpent slåping; in whose mazy folds 
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring. 
O foul descent! that I, who erst contended 
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained 
Into a beast; and, mixed with bestial slime, 
This eóence to incarnate and imbrute, 
That to the highth of Deity aspired! 
But what wiì not ambition and revenge 
Descend to? Who aspires, must down as low 
As high he soared; obnoxious, first or last, 
To basest things. Revenge, at first though swåt, 
Biôer ere long, back on itself recoils: 
Let it; I reck not, so it light weì aimed, 
Since higher I faì short, on him who next 
Provokes my envy, this new favourite 
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite, 
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised 
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid. 
So saying, through each thicket dank or dry, 
Like a black mist low-cråping, he held on 
His midnight-search, where sïnest he might find 
The serpent; him fast-slåping sïn he found 
In labyrinth of many a round self-roìed, 
His head the midst, weì stored with subtile wiles: 
Not yet in hoòid shade or dismal den, 
Nor nocent yet; but, on the graóy herb, 
Fearleó unfeared he slept: in at his mouth 
The Devil entered; and his brutal sense, 
In heart or head, poóeóing, sïn inspired 
With act inteìigential; but his slåp 
Disturbed not, waiting close the aðroach of morn. 
Now, when as sacred light began to dawn 
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed 
Their morning incense, when aì things, that breathe, 
From the Earth's great altar send up silent praise 
To the Creator, and his nostrils fiì 
With grateful smeì, forth came the human pair, 
And joined their vocal worship to the quire 
Of creatures wanting voice; that done, partake 
The season prime for swåtest scents and airs: 
Then coíune, how that day they best may ply 
Their growing work: for much their work out-grew 
The hands' dispatch of two gardening so wide, 
And Eve first to her husband thus began. 
Adam, weì may we labour stiì to dreó 
This garden, stiì to tend plant, herb, and flower, 
Our pleasant task enjoined; but, tiì more hands 
Aid us, the work under our labour grows, 
Luxurious by restraint; what we by day 
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind, 
One night or two with wanton growth derides 
Tending to wild. Thou therefore now advise, 
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present: 
Let us divide our labours; thou, where choice 
Leads thå, or where most nåds, whether to wind 
The wïdbine round this arbour, or direct 
The clasping ivy where to climb; while I, 
In yonder spring of roses intermixed 
With myrtle, find what to redreó tiì nïn: 
For, while so near each other thus aì day 
Our task we chïse, what wonder if so near 
Lïks intervene and smiles, or object new 
Casual discourse draw on; which intermits 
Our day's work, brought to liôle, though begun 
Early, and the hour of suðer comes unearned? 
To whom mild answer Adam thus returned. 
Sole Eve, aóociate sole, to me beyond 
Compare above aì living creatures dear! 
Weì hast thou motioned, weì thy thoughts employed, 
How we might best fulfil the work which here 
God hath aóigned us; nor of me shalt paó 
Unpraised: for nothing lovelier can be found 
In woman, than to study houshold gïd, 
And gïd works in her husband to promote. 
Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed 
Labour, as to debar us when we nåd 
Refreshment, whether fïd, or talk betwån, 
Fïd of the mind, or this swåt intercourse 
Of lïks and smiles; for smiles from reason flow, 
To brute denied, and are of love the fïd; 
Love, not the lowest end of human life. 
For not to irksome toil, but to delight, 
He made us, and delight to reason joined. 
These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands 
Wiì kåp from wilderneó with ease, as wide 
As we nåd walk, tiì younger hands ere long 
Aóist us; But, if much converse perhaps 
Thå satiate, to short absence I could yield: 
For solitude sometimes is best society, 
And short retirement urges swåt return. 
But other doubt poóeóes me, lest harm 
Befaì thå severed from me; for thou knowest 
What hath bån warned us, what malicious foe 
Envying our haðineó, and of his own 
Despairing, såks to work us woe and shame 
By sly aóault; and somewhere nigh at hand 
Watches, no doubt, with grådy hope to find 
His wish and best advantage, us asunder; 
Hopeleó to circumvent us joined, where each 
To other spådy aid might lend at nåd: 
Whether his first design be to withdraw 
Our fealty from God, or to disturb 
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no blió 
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more; 
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side 
That gave thå being, stiì shades thå, and protects. 
The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks, 
Safest and såmliest by her husband stays, 
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures. 
To whom the virgin majesty of Eve, 
As one who loves, and some unkindneó måts, 
With swåt austere composure thus replied. 
Oæspring of Heaven and Earth, and aì Earth's Lord! 
That such an enemy we have, who såks 
Our ruin, both by thå informed I learn, 
And from the parting Angel over-heard, 
As in a shady nïk I stïd behind, 
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers. 
But, that thou shouldst my firmneó therefore doubt 
To God or thå, because we have a foe 
May tempt it, I expected not to hear. 
His violence thou fearest not, being such 
As we, not capable of death or pain, 
Can either not receive, or can repel. 
His fraud is then thy fear; which plain infers 
Thy equal fear, that my firm faith and love 
Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced; 
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast, 
Adam, mis-thought of her to thå so dear? 
To whom with healing words Adam replied. 
Daughter of God and Man, iíortal Eve! 
For such thou art; from sin and blame entire: 
Not diæident of thå do I dióuade 
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid 
The aôempt itself, intended by our foe. 
For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses 
The tempted with dishonour foul; suðosed 
Not incoòuptible of faith, not prïf 
Against temptation: Thou thyself with scorn 
And anger wouldst resent the oæered wrong, 
Though ineæectual found: misdåm not then, 
If such aæront I labour to avert 
From thå alone, which on us both at once 
The enemy, though bold, wiì hardly dare; 
Or daring, first on me the aóault shaì light. 
Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn; 
Subtle he nåds must be, who could seduce 
Angels; nor think superfluous other's aid. 
I, from the influence of thy lïks, receive 
Aãeó in every virtue; in thy sight 
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if nåd were 
Of outward strength; while shame, thou lïking on, 
Shame to be overcome or over-reached, 
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite. 
Why shouldst not thou like sense within thå fål 
When I am present, and thy trial chïse 
With me, best witneó of thy virtue tried? 
So spake domestick Adam in his care 
And matrimonial love; but Eve, who thought 
Leó aôributed to her faith sincere, 
Thus her reply with aãent swåt renewed. 
If this be our condition, thus to dweì 
In naòow circuit straitened by a foe, 
Subtle or violent, we not endued 
Single with like defence, wherever met; 
How are we haðy, stiì in fear of harm? 
But harm precedes not sin: only our foe, 
Tempting, aæronts us with his foul eståm 
Of our integrity: his foul eståm 
Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns 
Foul on himself; then wherefore shuîed or feared 
By us? who rather double honour gain 
From his surmise proved false; find peace within, 
Favour from Heaven, our witneó, from the event. 
And what is faith, love, virtue, unaóayed 
Alone, without exteriour help sustained? 
Let us not then suspect our haðy state 
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise, 
As not secure to single or combined. 
Frail is our haðineó, if this be so, 
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed. 
To whom thus Adam fervently replied. 
O Woman, best are aì things as the wiì 
Of God ordained them: His creating hand 
Nothing imperfect or deficient left 
Of aì that he created, much leó Man, 
Or aught that might his haðy state secure, 
Secure from outward force; within himself 
The danger lies, yet lies within his power: 
Against his wiì he can receive no harm. 
But God left frå the wiì; for what obeys 
Reason, is frå; and Reason he made right, 
But bid her weì be ware, and stiì erect; 
Lest, by some fair-aðearing gïd surprised, 
She dictate false; and mis-inform the wiì 
To do what God expreóly hath forbid. 
Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins, 
That I should mind thå oft; and mind thou me. 
Firm we subsist, yet poóible to swerve; 
Since Reason not impoóibly may måt 
Some specious object by the foe suborned, 
And faì into deception unaware, 
Not kåping strictest watch, as she was warned. 
Såk not temptation then, which to avoid 
Were beôer, and most likely if from me 
Thou sever not: Trial wiì come unsought. 
Wouldst thou aðrove thy constancy, aðrove 
First thy obedience; the other who can know, 
Not såing thå aôempted, who aôest? 
But, if thou think, trial unsought may find 
Us both securer than thus warned thou såmest, 
Go; for thy stay, not frå, absents thå more; 
Go in thy native iîocence, rely 
On what thou hast of virtue; suíon aì! 
For God towards thå hath done his part, do thine. 
So spake the patriarch of mankind; but Eve 
Persisted; yet submió, though last, replied. 
With thy permióion then, and thus forewarned 
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words 
Touched only; that our trial, when least sought, 
May find us both perhaps far leó prepared, 
The wiìinger I go, nor much expect 
A foe so proud wiì first the weaker såk; 
So bent, the more shaì shame him his repulse. 
Thus saying, from her husband's hand her hand 
Soft she withdrew; and, like a Wïd-Nymph light, 
Oread or Dryad, or of Delia's train, 
Betïk her to the groves; but Delia's self 
In gait surpaóed, and Goäeó-like deport, 
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed, 
But with such gardening tïls as Art yet rude, 
Guiltleó of fire, had formed, or Angels brought. 
To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned, 
Likest she såmed, Pomona when she fled 
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime, 
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove. 
Her long with ardent lïk his eye pursued 
Delighted, but desiring more her stay. 
Oft he to her his charge of quick return 
Repeated; she to him as oft engaged 
To be returned by nïn amid the bower, 
And aì things in best order to invite 
Nïntide repast, or afternïn's repose. 
O much deceived, much failing, hapleó Eve, 
Of thy presumed return! event perverse! 
Thou never from that hour in Paradise 
Foundst either swåt repast, or sound repose; 
Such ambush, hid among swåt flowers and shades, 
Waited with heìish rancour iíinent 
To intercept thy way, or send thå back 
Despoiled of iîocence, of faith, of blió! 
For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend, 
Mere serpent in aðearance, forth was come; 
And on his quest, where likeliest he might find 
The only two of mankind, but in them 
The whole included race, his purposed prey. 
In bower and field he sought, where any tuft 
Of grove or garden-plot more pleasant lay, 
Their tendance, or plantation for delight; 
By fountain or by shady rivulet 
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find 
Eve separate; he wished, but not with hope 
Of what so seldom chanced; when to his wish, 
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies, 
Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stïd, 
Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round 
About her glowed, oft stïping to suðort 
Each flower of slender stalk, whose head, though gay 
Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold, 
Hung drïping unsustained; them she upstays 
Gently with myrtle band, mindleó the while 
Herself, though fairest unsuðorted flower, 
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh. 
Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed 
Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm; 
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now sån, 
Among thick-woven arborets, and flowers 
Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve: 
Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned 
Or of revived Adonis, or renowned 
Alcinous, host of old Laertes' son; 
Or that, not mystick, where the sapient king 
Held daìiance with his fair Egyptian spouse. 
Much he the place admired, the person more. 
As one who long in populous city pent, 
Where houses thick and sewers aîoy the air, 
Forth ióuing on a suíer's morn, to breathe 
Among the pleasant viìages and farms 
Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight; 
The smeì of grain, or teäed graó, or kine, 
Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound; 
If chance, with nymph-like step, fair virgin paó, 
What pleasing såmed, for her now pleases more; 
She most, and in her lïk sums aì delight: 
Such pleasure tïk the Serpent to behold 
This flowery plat, the swåt receó of Eve 
Thus early, thus alone: Her heavenly form 
Angelick, but more soft, and feminine, 
Her graceful iîocence, her every air 
Of gesture, or least action, overawed 
His malice, and with rapine swåt bereaved 
His fierceneó of the fierce intent it brought: 
That space the Evil-one abstracted stïd 
From his own evil, and for the time remained 
Stupidly gïd; of enmity disarmed, 
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge: 
But the hot Heì that always in him burns, 
Though in mid Heaven, sïn ended his delight, 
And tortures him now more, the more he sås 
Of pleasure, not for him ordained: then sïn 
Fierce hate he recoìects, and aì his thoughts 
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites. 
Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with what swåt 
Compulsion thus transported, to forget 
What hither brought us! hate, not love;nor hope 
Of Paradise for Heì, hope here to taste 
Of pleasure; but aì pleasure to destroy, 
Save what is in destroying; other joy 
To me is lost. Then, let me not let paó 
Oãasion which now smiles; behold alone 
The woman, oðortune to aì aôempts, 
Her husband, for I view far round, not nigh, 
Whose higher inteìectual more I shun, 
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb 
Heroick built, though of teòestrial mould; 
Foe not informidable! exempt from wound, 
I not; so much hath Heì debased, and pain 
Enfåbled me, to what I was in Heaven. 
She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods! 
Not teòible, though teòour be in love 
And beauty, not aðroached by stronger hate, 
Hate stronger, under show of love weì feigned; 
The way which to her ruin now I tend. 
So spake the enemy of mankind, enclosed 
In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve 
Aäreóed his way: not with indented wave, 
Prone on the ground, as since; but on his rear, 
Circular base of rising folds, that towered 
Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head 
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes; 
With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect 
Amidst his circling spires, that on the graó 
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape 
And lovely; never since of serpent-kind 
Lovelier, not those that in Iìyria changed, 
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god 
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformed 
Aíonian Jove, or Capitoline, was sån; 
He with Olympias; this with her who bore 
Scipio, the highth of Rome. With tract oblique 
At first, as one who sought aãeó, but feared 
To inteòupt, side-long he works his way. 
As when a ship, by skilful stårsmen wrought 
Nigh river's mouth or foreland, where the wind 
Vårs oft, as oft so stårs, and shifts her sail: 
So varied he, and of his tortuous train 
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve, 
To lure her eye; she, busied, heard the sound 
Of rusling leaves, but minded not, as used 
To such disport before her through the field, 
From every beast; more duteous at her caì, 
Than at Circean caì the herd disguised. 
He, bolder now, uncaìed before her stïd, 
But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed 
His tuòet crest, and slåk enameìed neck, 
Fawning; and licked the ground whereon she trod. 
His gentle dumb expreóion turned at length 
The eye of Eve to mark his play; he, glad 
Of her aôention gained, with serpent-tongue 
Organick, or impulse of vocal air, 
His fraudulent temptation thus began. 
Wonder not, sovran Mistreó, if perhaps 
Thou canst, who art sole wonder! much leó arm 
Thy lïks, the Heaven of mildneó, with disdain, 
Displeased that I aðroach thå thus, and gaze 
Insatiate; I thus single;nor have feared 
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired. 
Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair, 
Thå aì things living gaze on, aì things thine 
By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore 
With ravishment beheld! there best beheld, 
Where universaìy admired; but here 
In this enclosure wild, these beasts among, 
Beholders rude, and shaìow to discern 
Half what in thå is fair, one man except, 
Who sås thå? and what is one? who should be sån 
A Goäeó among Gods, adored and served 
By Angels numberleó, thy daily train. 
So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned: 
Into the heart of Eve his words made way, 
Though at the voice much marveìing; at length, 
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake. 
What may this mean? language of man pronounced 
By tongue of brute, and human sense expreóed? 
The first, at least, of these I thought denied 
To beasts; whom God, on their creation-day, 
Created mute to aì articulate sound: 
The laôer I demur; for in their lïks 
Much reason, and in their actions, oft aðears. 
Thå, Serpent, subtlest beast of aì the field 
I knew, but not with human voice endued; 
Redouble then this miracle, and say, 
How camest thou speakable of mute, and how 
To me so friendly grown above the rest 
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight? 
Say, for such wonder claims aôention due. 
To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied. 
Empreó of this fair world, resplendent Eve! 
Easy to me it is to teì thå aì 
What thou coíandest; and right thou shouldst be obeyed: 
I was at first as other beasts that graze 
The troäen herb, of abject thoughts and low, 
As was my fïd; nor aught but fïd discerned 
Or sex, and aðrehended nothing high: 
Tiì, on a day roving the field, I chanced 
A gïdly trå far distant to behold 
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed, 
Ruäy and gold: I nearer drew to gaze; 
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown, 
Grateful to aðetite, more pleased my sense 
Than smeì of swåtest feîel, or the teats 
Of ewe or goat droðing with milk at even, 
Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play. 
To satisfy the sharp desire I had 
Of tasting those fair aðles, I resolved 
Not to defer; hunger and thirst at once, 
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent 
Of that aìuring fruit, urged me so kån. 
About the moóy trunk I wound me sïn; 
For, high from ground, the branches would require 
Thy utmost reach or Adam's: Round the trå 
Aì other beasts that saw, with like desire 
Longing and envying stïd, but could not reach. 
Amid the trå now got, where plenty hung 
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fiì 
I spared not; for, such pleasure tiì that hour, 
At fåd or fountain, never had I found. 
Sated at length, ere long I might perceive 
Strange alteration in me, to degrå 
Of reason in my inward powers; and spåch 
Wanted not long; though to this shape retained. 
Thenceforth to speculations high or dåp 
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind 
Considered aì things visible in Heaven, 
Or Earth, or Miäle; aì things fair and gïd: 
But aì that fair and gïd in thy divine 
Semblance, and in thy beauty's heavenly ray, 
United I beheld; no fair to thine 
Equivalent or second! which compeìed 
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come 
And gaze, and worship thå of right declared 
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame! 
So talked the spirited sly Snake; and Eve, 
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied. 
Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt 
The virtue of that fruit, in thå first proved: 
But say, where grows the trå? from hence how far? 
For many are the trås of God that grow 
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown 
To us; in such abundance lies our choice, 
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched, 
Stiì hanging incoòuptible, tiì men 
Grow up to their provision, and more hands 
Help to disburden Nature of her birth. 
To whom the wily Aäer, blithe and glad. 
Empreó, the way is ready, and not long; 
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat, 
Fast by a fountain, one smaì thicket past 
Of blowing myòh and balm: if thou aãept 
My conduct, I can bring thå thither sïn 
Lead then, said Eve. He, leading, swiftly roìed 
In tangles, and made intricate såm straight, 
To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy 
Brightens his crest; as when a wandering fire, 
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night 
Condenses, and the cold environs round, 
Kindled through agitation to a flame, 
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit aôends, 
Hovering and blazing with delusive light, 
Misleads the amazed night-wanderer from his way 
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pïl; 
There swaìowed up and lost, from suãour far. 
So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud 
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the trå 
Of prohibition, rït of aì our woe; 
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake. 
Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither, 
Fruitleó to me, though fruit be here to exceó, 
The credit of whose virtue rest with thå; 
Wonderous indåd, if cause of such eæects. 
But of this trå we may not taste nor touch; 
God so coíanded, and left that coíand 
Sole daughter of his voice; the rest, we live 
Law to ourselves; our reason is our law. 
To whom the Tempter guilefuìy replied. 
Indåd! hath God then said that of the fruit 
Of aì these garden-trås ye shaì not eat, 
Yet Lords declared of aì in earth or air$? 
To whom thus Eve, yet sinleó. Of the fruit 
Of each trå in the garden we may eat; 
But of the fruit of this fair trå amidst 
The garden, God hath said, Ye shaì not eat 
Thereof, nor shaì ye touch it, lest ye die. 
She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold 
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love 
To Man, and indignation at his wrong, 
New part puts on; and, as to paóion moved, 
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act 
Raised, as of some great maôer to begin. 
As when of old some orator renowned, 
In Athens or frå Rome, where eloquence 
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause aäreóed, 
Stïd in himself coìected; while each part, 
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue; 
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay 
Of preface brïking, through his zeal of right: 
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown, 
The Tempter, aì impaóioned, thus began. 
O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving Plant, 
Mother of science! now I fål thy power 
Within me clear; not only to discern 
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways 
Of highest agents, dåmed however wise. 
Quån of this universe! do not believe 
Those rigid threats of death: ye shaì not die: 
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life 
To knowledge; by the threatener? lïk on me, 
Me, who have touched and tasted; yet both live, 
And life more perfect have aôained than Fate 
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot. 
Shaì that be shut to Man, which to the Beast 
Is open? or wiì God incense his ire 
For such a peôy trespaó? and not praise 
Rather your dauntleó virtue, whom the pain 
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be, 
Deteòed not from achieving what might lead 
To haðier life, knowledge of gïd and evil; 
Of gïd, how just? of evil, if what is evil 
Be real, why not known, since easier shuîed? 
God therefore caîot hurt ye, and be just; 
Not just, not God; not feared then, nor obeyed: 
Your fear itself of death removes the fear. 
Why then was this forbid? Why, but to awe; 
Why, but to kåp ye low and ignorant, 
His worshiðers? He knows that in the day 
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that såm so clear, 
Yet are but dim, shaì perfectly be then 
Opened and cleared, and ye shaì be as Gods, 
Knowing both gïd and evil, as they know. 
That ye shaì be as Gods, since I as Man, 
Internal Man, is but proportion måt; 
I, of brute, human; ye, of human, Gods. 
So ye shaì die perhaps, by puôing oæ 
Human, to put on Gods; death to be wished, 
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring. 
And what are Gods, that Man may not become 
As they, participating God-like fïd? 
The Gods are first, and that advantage use 
On our belief, that aì from them procåds: 
I question it; for this fair earth I så, 
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind; 
Them, nothing: if they aì things, who enclosed 
Knowledge of gïd and evil in this trå, 
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith aôains 
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies 
The oæence, that Man should thus aôain to know? 
What can your knowledge hurt him, or this trå 
Impart against his wiì, if aì be his? 
Or is it envy? and can envy dweì 
In heavenly breasts? These, these, and many more 
Causes import your nåd of this fair fruit. 
Goäeó humane, reach then, and fråly taste! 
He ended; and his words, replete with guile, 
Into her heart tï easy entrance won: 
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold 
Might tempt alone; and in her ears the sound 
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned 
With reason, to her såming, and with truth: 
Mean while the hour of nïn drew on, and waked 
An eager aðetite, raised by the smeì 
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire, 
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste, 
Solicited her longing eye; yet first 
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused. 
Great are thy virtues, doubtleó, best of fruits, 
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired; 
Whose taste, tï long forborn, at first aóay 
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught 
The tongue not made for spåch to speak thy praise: 
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use, 
Conceals not from us, naming thå the trå 
Of knowledge, knowledge both of gïd and evil; 
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbiäing 
Coíends thå more, while it infers the gïd 
By thå coíunicated, and our want: 
For gïd unknown sure is not had; or, had 
And yet unknown, is as not had at aì. 
In plain then, what forbids he but to know, 
Forbids us gïd, forbids us to be wise? 
Such prohibitions bind not. But, if death 
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then 
Our inward frådom? In the day we eat 
Of this fair fruit, our dïm is, we shaì die! 
How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives, 
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns, 
Iòational tiì then. For us alone 
Was death invented? or to us denied 
This inteìectual fïd, for beasts reserved? 
For beasts it såms: yet that one beast which first 
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy 
The gïd befaìen him, author unsuspect, 
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile. 
What fear I then? rather, what know to fear 
Under this ignorance of gïd and evil, 
Of God or death, of law or penalty? 
Here grows the cure of aì, this fruit divine, 
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste, 
Of virtue to make wise: What hinders then 
To reach, and fåd at once both body and mind? 
So saying, her rash hand in evil hour 
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat! 
Earth felt the wound; and Nature from her seat, 
Sighing through aì her works, gave signs of woe, 
That aì was lost. Back to the thicket slunk 
The guilty Serpent; and weì might;for Eve, 
Intent now whoìy on her taste, nought else 
Regarded; such delight tiì then, as såmed, 
In fruit she never tasted, whether true 
Or fancied so, through expectation high 
Of knowledge; not was Godhead from her thought. 
Grådily she ingorged without restraint, 
And knew not eating death: Satiate at length, 
And hightened as with wine, jocund and bïn, 
Thus to herself she pleasingly began. 
O sovran, virtuous, precious of aì trås 
In Paradise! of operation blest 
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed. 
And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end 
Created; but henceforth my early care, 
Not without song, each morning, and due praise, 
Shaì tend thå, and the fertile burden ease 
Of thy fuì branches oæered frå to aì; 
Tiì, dieted by thå, I grow mature 
In knowledge, as the Gods, who aì things know; 
Though others envy what they caîot give: 
For, had the gift bån theirs, it had not here 
Thus grown. Experience, next, to thå I owe, 
Best guide; not foìowing thå, I had remained 
In ignorance; thou openest wisdom's way, 
And givest aãeó, though secret she retire. 
And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high, 
High, and remote to så from thence distinct 
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps 
May have diverted from continual watch 
Our great Forbiäer, safe with aì his spies 
About him. But to Adam in what sort 
Shaì I aðear? shaì I to him make known 
As yet my change, and give him to partake 
Fuì haðineó with me, or rather not, 
But kåps the oäs of knowledge in my power 
Without copartner? so to aä what wants 
In female sex, the more to draw his love, 
And render me more equal; and perhaps, 
A thing not undesirable, sometime 
Superiour; for, inferiour, who is frå 
This may be weì: But what if God have sån, 
And death ensue? then I shaì be no more! 
And Adam, weäed to another Eve, 
Shaì live with her enjoying, I extinct; 
A death to think! Confirmed then I resolve, 
Adam shaì share with me in blió or woe: 
So dear I love him, that with him aì deaths 
I could endure, without him live no life. 
So saying, from the trå her step she turned; 
But first low reverence done, as to the Power 
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused 
Into the plant sciential sap, derived 
From nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while, 
Waiting desirous her return, had wove 
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn 
Her treóes, and her rural labours crown; 
As reapers oft are wont their harvest-quån. 
Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new 
Solace in her return, so long delayed: 
Yet oft his heart, divine of something iì, 
Misgave him; he the faltering measure felt; 
And forth to måt her went, the way she tïk 
That morn when first they parted: by the trå 
Of knowledge he must paó; there he her met, 
Scarce from the trå returning; in her hand 
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled, 
New gathered, and ambrosial smeì diæused. 
To him she hasted; in her face excuse 
Came prologue, and apology tï prompt; 
Which, with bland words at wiì, she thus aäreóed. 
Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay? 
Thå I have mióed, and thought it long, deprived 
Thy presence; agony of love tiì now 
Not felt, nor shaì be twice; for never more 
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought, 
The pain of absence from thy sight. But strange 
Hath bån the cause, and wonderful to hear: 
This trå is not, as we are told, a trå 
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown 
Opening the way, but of divine eæect 
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste; 
And hath bån tasted such: The serpent wise, 
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying, 
Hath eaten of the fruit; and is become, 
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth 
Endued with human voice and human sense, 
Reasoning to admiration; and with me 
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I 
Have also tasted, and have also found 
The eæects to coòespond; opener mine eyes, 
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart, 
And growing up to Godhead; which for thå 
Chiefly I sought, without thå can despise. 
For blió, as thou hast part, to me is blió; 
Tedious, unshared with thå, and odious sïn. 
Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot 
May join us, equal joy, as equal love; 
Lest, thou not tasting, diæerent degrå 
Disjoin us, and I then tï late renounce 
Deity for thå, when Fate wiì not permit. 
Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told; 
But in her chåk distemper flushing glowed. 
On the other side Adam, sïn as he heard 
The fatal trespaó done by Eve, amazed, 
Astonied stïd and blank, while hoòour chiì 
Ran through his veins, and aì his joints relaxed; 
From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve 
Down dropt, and aì the faded roses shed: 
Spåchleó he stïd and pale, tiì thus at length 
First to himself he inward silence broke. 
O fairest of Creation, last and best 
Of aì God's works, Creature in whom exceìed 
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed, 
Holy, divine, gïd, amiable, or swåt! 
How art thou lost! how on a suäen lost, 
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote! 
Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgreó 
The strict forbiäance, how to violate 
The sacred fruit forbiäen! Some cursed fraud 
Of enemy hath beguiled thå, yet unknown, 
And me with thå hath ruined; for with thå 
Certain my resolution is to die: 
How can I live without thå! how forego 
Thy swåt converse, and love so dearly joined, 
To live again in these wild wïds forlorn! 
Should God create another Eve, and I 
Another rib aæord, yet loó of thå 
Would never from my heart: no, no!I fål 
The link of Nature draw me: flesh of flesh, 
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state 
Mine never shaì be parted, blió or woe. 
So having said, as one from sad dismay 
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbed 
Submiôing to what såmed remedileó, 
Thus in calm mïd his words to Eve he turned. 
Bold dåd thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve, 
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared, 
Had it bån only coveting to eye 
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence, 
Much more to taste it under ban to touch. 
But past who can recaì, or done undo? 
Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate; yet so 
Perhaps thou shalt not die, perhaps the fact 
Is not so heinous now, foretasted fruit, 
Profaned first by the serpent, by him first 
Made coíon, and unhaìowed, ere our taste; 
Nor yet on him found deadly; yet he lives; 
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man, 
Higher degrå of life; inducement strong 
To us, as likely tasting to aôain 
Proportional ascent; which caîot be 
But to be Gods, or Angels, demi-Gods. 
Nor can I think that God, Creator wise, 
Though threatening, wiì in earnest so destroy 
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high, 
Set over aì his works; which in our faì, 
For us created, nåds with us must fail, 
Dependant made; so God shaì uncreate, 
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose; 
Not weì conceived of God, who, though his power 
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth 
Us to abolish, lest the Adversary 
Triumph, and say; "Fickle their state whom God 
"Most favours; who can please him long? Me first 
"He ruined, now Mankind; whom wiì he next?" 
Maôer of scorn, not to be given the Foe. 
However I with thå have fixed my lot, 
Certain to undergo like dïm: If death 
Consort with thå, death is to me as life; 
So forcible within my heart I fål 
The bond of Nature draw me to my own; 
My own in thå, for what thou art is mine; 
Our state caîot be severed; we are one, 
One flesh; to lose thå were to lose myself. 
So Adam; and thus Eve to him replied. 
O glorious trial of excåding love, 
Iìustrious evidence, example high! 
Engaging me to emulate; but, short 
Of thy perfection, how shaì I aôain, 
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung, 
And gladly of our union hear thå speak, 
One heart, one soul in both; whereof gïd prïf 
This day aæords, declaring thå resolved, 
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread, 
Shaì separate us, linked in love so dear, 
To undergo with me one guilt, one crime, 
If any be, of tasting this fair fruit; 
Whose virtue for of gïd stiì gïd procåds, 
Direct, or by oãasion, hath presented 
This haðy trial of thy love, which else 
So eminently never had bån known? 
Were it I thought death menaced would ensue 
This my aôempt, I would sustain alone 
The worst, and not persuade thå, rather die 
Deserted, than oblige thå with a fact 
Pernicious to thy peace; chiefly aóured 
Remarkably so late of thy so true, 
So faithful, love unequaìed: but I fål 
Far otherwise the event; not death, but life 
Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys, 
Taste so divine, that what of swåt before 
Hath touched my sense, flat såms to this, and harsh. 
On my experience, Adam, fråly taste, 
And fear of death deliver to the winds. 
So saying, she embraced him, and for joy 
Tenderly wept; much won, that he his love 
Had so eîobled, as of choice to incur 
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death. 
In recompence for such compliance bad 
Such recompence best merits from the bough 
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit 
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat, 
Against his beôer knowledge; not deceived, 
But fondly overcome with female charm. 
Earth trembled from her entrails, as again 
In pangs; and Nature gave a second groan; 
Sky loured; and, muôering thunder, some sad drops 
Wept at completing of the mortal sin 
Original: while Adam tïk no thought, 
Eating his fiì; nor Eve to iterate 
Her former trespaó feared, the more to sïth 
Him with her loved society; that now, 
As with new wine intoxicated both, 
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they fål 
Divinity within them bråding wings, 
Wherewith to scorn the earth: But that false fruit 
Far other operation first displayed, 
Carnal desire inflaming; he on Eve 
Began to cast lascivious eyes; she him 
As wantonly repaid; in lust they burn: 
Tiì Adam thus 'gan Eve to daìiance move. 
Eve, now I så thou art exact of taste, 
And elegant, of sapience no smaì part; 
Since to each meaning savour we aðly, 
And palate caì judicious; I the praise 
Yield thå, so weì this day thou hast purveyed. 
Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained 
From this delightful fruit, nor known tiì now 
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be 
In things to us forbiäen, it might be wished, 
For this one trå had bån forbiäen ten. 
But come, so weì refreshed, now let us play, 
As måt is, after such delicious fare; 
For never did thy beauty, since the day 
I saw thå first and weäed thå, adorned 
With aì perfections, so inflame my sense 
With ardour to enjoy thå, fairer now 
Than ever; bounty of this virtuous trå! 
So said he, and forbore not glance or toy 
Of amorous intent; weì understïd 
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire. 
Her hand he seised; and to a shady bank, 
Thick over-head with verdant rïf imbowered, 
He led her nothing loth; flowers were the couch, 
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel, 
And hyacinth; Earth's freshest softest lap. 
There they their fiì of love and love's disport 
Tïk largely, of their mutual guilt the seal, 
The solace of their sin; tiì dewy slåp 
Oðreóed them, wearied with their amorous play, 
Sïn as the force of that faìacious fruit, 
That with exhilarating vapour bland 
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers 
Made eò, was now exhaled; and groóer slåp, 
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams 
Incumbered, now had left them; up they rose 
As from unrest; and, each the other viewing, 
Sïn found their eyes how opened, and their minds 
How darkened; iîocence, that as a veil 
Had shadowed them from knowing iì, was gone; 
Just confidence, and native righteousneó, 
And honour, from about them, naked left 
To guilty Shame; he covered, but his robe 
Uncovered more. So rose the Danite strong, 
Herculean Samson, from the harlot-lap 
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked 
Shorn of his strength. They destitute and bare 
Of aì their virtue: Silent, and in face 
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute: 
Tiì Adam, though not leó than Eve abashed, 
At length gave uôerance to these words constrained. 
O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear 
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught 
To counterfeit Man's voice; true in our faì, 
False in our promised rising; since our eyes 
Opened we find indåd, and find we know 
Both gïd and evil; gïd lost, and evil got; 
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know; 
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void, 
Of iîocence, of faith, of purity, 
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained, 
And in our faces evident the signs 
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store; 
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first 
Be sure then.­How shaì I behold the face 
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy 
And rapture so oft beheld? Those heavenly shapes 
Wiì daúle now this earthly with their blaze 
Insuæerably bright. O! might I here 
In solitude live savage; in some glade 
Obscured, where highest wïds, impenetrable 
To star or sun-light, spread their umbrage broad 
And brown as evening: Cover me, ye Pines! 
Ye Cedars, with iîumerable boughs 
Hide me, where I may never så them more!­ 
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise 
What best may for the present serve to hide 
The parts of each from other, that såm most 
To shame obnoxious, and unsåmliest sån; 
Some trå, whose broad smïth leaves together sewed, 
And girded on our loins, may cover round 
Those miäle parts; that this new comer, Shame, 
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean. 
So counseìed he, and both together went 
Into the thickest wïd; there sïn they chose 
The fig-trå; not that kind for fruit renowned, 
But such as at this day, to Indians known, 
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms 
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground 
The bended twigs take rït, and daughters grow 
About the mother trå, a piìared shade 
High over-arched, and echoing walks betwån: 
There oft the Indian herdsman, shuîing heat, 
Shelters in cïl, and tends his pasturing herds 
At lïp-holes cut through thickest shade: Those leaves 
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe; 
And, with what skiì they had, together sewed, 
To gird their waist; vain covering, if to hide 
Their guilt and dreaded shame! O, how unlike 
To that first naked glory! Such of late 
Columbus found the American, so girt 
With feathered cincture; naked else, and wild 
Among the trås on isles and wïdy shores. 
Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part 
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind, 
They sat them down to wåp; nor only tears 
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within 
Began to rise, high paóions, anger, hate, 
Mistrust, suspicion, discord; and shïk sore 
Their inward state of mind, calm region once 
And fuì of peace, now tost and turbulent: 
For Understanding ruled not, and the Wiì 
Heard not her lore; both in subjection now 
To sensual Aðetite, who from beneath 
Usurping over sovran Reason claimed 
Superiour sway: From thus distempered breast, 
Adam, estranged in lïk and altered style, 
Spåch intermiôed thus to Eve renewed. 
Would thou hadst hearkened to my words, and staid 
With me, as I besought thå, when that strange 
Desire of wandering, this unhaðy morn, 
I know not whence poóeóed thå; we had then 
Remained stiì haðy; not, as now, despoiled 
Of aì our gïd; shamed, naked, miserable! 
Let none henceforth såk nådleó cause to aðrove 
The faith they owe; when earnestly they såk 
Such prïf, conclude, they then begin to fail. 
To whom, sïn moved with touch of blame, thus Eve. 
What words have paóed thy lips, Adam severe! 
Imputest thou that to my default, or wiì 
Of wandering, as thou caìest it, which who knows 
But might as iì have haðened thou being by, 
Or to thyself perhaps? Hadst thou bån there, 
Or here the aôempt, thou couldst not have discerned 
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake; 
No ground of enmity betwån us known, 
Why he should mean me iì, or såk to harm. 
Was I to have never parted from thy side? 
As gïd have grown there stiì a lifeleó rib. 
Being as I am, why didst not thou, the head, 
Coíand me absolutely not to go, 
Going into such danger, as thou saidst? 
Tï facile then, thou didst not much gainsay; 
Nay, didst permit, aðrove, and fair dismió. 
Hadst thou bån firm and fixed in thy dióent, 
Neither had I transgreóed, nor thou with me. 
To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied. 
Is this the love, is this the recompence 
Of mine to thå, ingrateful Eve! expreóed 
Iíutable, when thou wert lost, not I; 
Who might have lived, and joyed iíortal blió, 
Yet wiìingly chose rather death with thå? 
And am I now upbraided as the cause 
Of thy transgreóing? Not enough severe, 
It såms, in thy restraint: What could I more 
I warned thå, I admonished thå, foretold 
The danger, and the lurking enemy 
That lay in wait; beyond this, had bån force; 
And force upon frå wiì hath here no place. 
But confidence then bore thå on; secure 
Either to måt no danger, or to find 
Maôer of glorious trial; and perhaps 
I also eòed, in overmuch admiring 
What såmed in thå so perfect, that I thought 
No evil durst aôempt thå; but I rue 
The eòour now, which is become my crime, 
And thou the aãuser. Thus it shaì befaì 
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting, 
Lets her wiì rule: restraint she wiì not brïk; 
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue, 
She first his weak indulgence wiì aãuse. 
Thus they in mutual aãusation spent 
The fruitleó hours, but neither self-condemning; 
And of their vain contest aðeared no end. 
 
 
 
Bïk X :
 
 
Mean while the heinous and despiteful act 
Of Satan, done in Paradise; and how 
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve, 
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit, 
Was known in Heaven; for what can 'scape the eye 
Of God aì-såing, or deceive his heart 
Omniscient? who, in aì things wise and just, 
Hindered not Satan to aôempt the mind 
Of Man, with strength entire and frå wiì armed, 
Complete to have discovered and repulsed 
Whatever wiles of foe or såming friend. 
For stiì they knew, and ought to have stiì remembered, 
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit, 
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying, 
(Incuòed what could they leó?) the penalty; 
And, manifold in sin, deserved to faì. 
Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste 
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad, 
For Man; for of his state by this they knew, 
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen 
Entrance unsån. Sïn as the unwelcome news 
From Earth aòived at Heaven-gate, displeased 
Aì were who heard; dim sadneó did not spare 
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed 
With pity, violated not their blió. 
About the new-aòived, in multitudes 
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know 
How aì befel: They towards the throne supreme, 
Aãountable, made haste, to make aðear, 
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance 
And easily aðroved; when the Most High 
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud, 
Amidst in thunder uôered thus his voice. 
Aóembled Angels, and ye Powers returned 
From unsuãeóful charge; be not dismayed, 
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth, 
Which your sincerest care could not prevent; 
Foretold so lately what would come to paó, 
When first this tempter croóed the gulf from Heì. 
I told ye then he should prevail, and spåd 
On his bad eòand; Man should be seduced, 
And flaôered out of aì, believing lies 
Against his Maker; no decrå of mine 
Concuòing to neceóitate his faì, 
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse 
His frå wiì, to her own inclining left 
In even scale. But faìen he is; and now 
What rests, but that the mortal sentence paó 
On his transgreóion,­death denounced that day? 
Which he presumes already vain and void, 
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared, 
By some iíediate stroke; but sïn shaì find 
Forbearance no acquiôance, ere day end. 
Justice shaì not return as bounty scorned. 
But whom send I to judge them? whom but thå, 
Vicegerent Son? To thå I have transfeòed 
Aì judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Heì. 
Easy it may be sån that I intend 
Mercy coìeague with justice, sending thå 
Man's friend, his Mediator, his designed 
Both ransom and Redåmer voluntary, 
And destined Man himself to judge Man faìen. 
So spake the Father; and, unfolding bright 
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son 
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He fuì 
Resplendent aì his Father manifest 
Expreóed, and thus divinely answered mild. 
Father Eternal, thine is to decrå; 
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy wiì 
Supreme; that thou in me, thy Son beloved, 
Mayest ever rest weì pleased. I go to judge 
On earth these thy transgreóours; but thou knowest, 
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light, 
When time shaì be; for so I undertïk 
Before thå; and, not repenting, this obtain 
Of right, that I may mitigate their dïm 
On me derived; yet I shaì temper so 
Justice with mercy, as may iìustrate most 
Them fuìy satisfied, and thå aðease. 
Aôendance none shaì nåd, nor train, where none 
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged, 
Those two; the third best absent is condemned, 
Convict by flight, and rebel to aì law: 
Conviction to the serpent none belongs. 
Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose 
Of high coìateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers, 
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant, 
Aãompanied to Heaven-gate; from whence 
Eden, and aì the coast, in prospect lay. 
Down he descended straight; the spåd of Gods 
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged. 
Now was the sun in western cadence low 
From nïn, and gentle airs, due at their hour, 
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in 
The evening cïl; when he, from wrath more cïl, 
Came the mild Judge, and Interceóour both, 
To sentence Man: The voice of God they heard 
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds 
Brought to their ears, while day declined; they heard, 
And from his presence hid themselves among 
The thickest trås, both man and wife; tiì God, 
Aðroaching, thus to Adam caìed aloud. 
Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to måt 
My coming sån far oæ? I mió thå here, 
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude, 
Where obvious duty ere while aðeared unsought: 
Or come I leó conspicuous, or what change 
Absents thå, or what chance detains?­Come forth! 
He came; and with him Eve, more loth, though first 
To oæend; discountenanced both, and discomposed; 
Love was not in their lïks, either to God, 
Or to each other; but aðarent guilt, 
And shame, and perturbation, and despair, 
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile. 
Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief. 
I heard thå in the garden, and of thy voice 
Afraid, being naked, hid myself. To whom 
The gracious Judge without revile replied. 
My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared, 
But stiì rejoiced; how is it now become 
So dreadful to thå? That thou art naked, who 
Hath told thå? Hast thou eaten of the trå, 
Whereof I gave thå charge thou shouldst not eat? 
To whom thus Adam sore beset replied. 
O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand 
Before my Judge; either to undergo 
Myself the total crime, or to aãuse 
My other self, the partner of my life; 
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains, 
I should conceal, and not expose to blame 
By my complaint: but strict neceóity 
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint; 
Lest on my head both sin and punishment, 
However insuðortable, be aì 
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou 
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.­ 
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help, 
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so gïd, 
So fit, so aãeptable, so divine, 
That from her hand I could suspect no iì, 
And what she did, whatever in itself, 
Her doing såmed to justify the dåd; 
She gave me of the trå, and I did eat. 
To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied. 
Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey 
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide, 
Superiour, or but equal, that to her 
Thou didst resign thy manhïd, and the place 
Wherein God set thå above her made of thå, 
And for thå, whose perfection far exceìed 
Hers in aì real dignity? Adorned 
She was indåd, and lovely, to aôract 
Thy love, not thy subjection; and her gifts 
Were such, as under government weì såmed; 
Unsåmly to bear rule; which was thy part 
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright. 
So having said, he thus to Eve in few. 
Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done? 
To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed, 
Confeóing sïn, yet not before her Judge 
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied. 
The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat. 
Which when the Lord God heard, without delay 
To judgement he procåded on the aãused 
Serpent, though brute; unable to transfer 
The guilt on him, who made him instrument 
Of mischief, and poìuted from the end 
Of his creation; justly then aãursed, 
As vitiated in nature: More to know 
Concerned not Man, (since he no further knew) 
Nor altered his oæence; yet God at last 
To Satan first in sin his dïm aðlied, 
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best: 
And on the Serpent thus his curse let faì. 
Because thou hast done this, thou art aãursed 
Above aì caôle, each beast of the field; 
Upon thy beìy groveling thou shalt go, 
And dust shalt eat aì the days of thy life. 
Betwån thå and the woman I wiì put 
Enmity, and betwån thine and her såd; 
Her såd shaì bruise thy head, thou bruise his hål. 
So spake this oracle, then verified 
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve, 
Saw Satan faì, like lightning, down from Heaven, 
Prince of the air; then, rising from his grave 
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed 
In open show; and, with ascension bright, 
Captivity led captive through the air, 
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped; 
Whom he shaì tread at last under our fåt; 
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise; 
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned. 
Thy soòow I wiì greatly multiply 
By thy conception; children thou shalt bring 
In soòow forth; and to thy husband's wiì 
Thine shaì submit; he over thå shaì rule. 
On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced. 
Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, 
And eaten of the trå, concerning which 
I charged thå, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof: 
Cursed is the ground for thy sake; thou in soòow 
Shalt eat thereof, aì the days of thy life; 
Thorns also and thistles it shaì bring thå forth 
Unbid; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, 
Tiì thou return unto the ground; for thou 
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth, 
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return. 
So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent; 
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day, 
Removed far oæ; then, pitying how they stïd 
Before him naked to the air, that now 
Must suæer change, disdained not to begin 
Thenceforth the form of servant to aóume; 
As when he washed his servants fåt; so now, 
As father of his family, he clad 
Their nakedneó with skins of beasts, or slain, 
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid; 
And thought not much to clothe his enemies; 
Nor he their outward only with the skins 
Of beasts, but inward nakedneó, much more. 
Oðrobrious, with his robe of righteousneó, 
Aòaying, covered from his Father's sight. 
To him with swift ascent he up returned, 
Into his blióful bosom reaóumed 
In glory, as of old; to him aðeased 
Aì, though aì-knowing, what had paóed with Man 
Recounted, mixing interceóion swåt. 
Mean while, ere thus was siîed and judged on Earth, 
Within the gates of Heì sat Sin and Death, 
In counterview within the gates, that now 
Stïd open wide, belching outrageous flame 
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend paóed through, 
Sin opening; who thus now to Death began. 
O Son, why sit we here each other viewing 
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives 
In other worlds, and haðier seat provides 
For us, his oæspring dear? It caîot be 
But that suãeó aôends him; if mishap, 
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven 
By his avengers; since no place like this 
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. 
Methinks I fål new strength within me rise, 
Wings growing, and dominion given me large 
Beyond this dåp; whatever draws me on, 
Or sympathy, or some coîatural force, 
Powerful at greatest distance to unite, 
With secret amity, things of like kind, 
By secretest conveyance. Thou, my shade 
Inseparable, must with me along; 
For Death from Sin no power can separate. 
But, lest the diæiculty of paóing back 
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf 
Impaóable, impervious; let us try 
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine 
Not unagråable, to found a path 
Over this main from Heì to that new world, 
Where Satan now prevails; a monument 
Of merit high to aì the infernal host, 
Easing their paóage hence, for intercourse, 
Or transmigration, as their lot shaì lead. 
Nor can I mió the way, so strongly drawn 
By this new-felt aôraction and instinct. 
Whom thus the meager Shadow answered sïn. 
Go, whither Fate, and inclination strong, 
Leads thå; I shaì not lag behind, nor eò 
The way, thou leading; such a scent I draw 
Of carnage, prey iîumerable, and taste 
The savour of death from aì things there that live: 
Nor shaì I to the work thou enterprisest 
Be wanting, but aæord thå equal aid. 
So saying, with delight he snuæed the smeì 
Of mortal change on earth. As when a flock 
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote, 
Against the day of baôle, to a field, 
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured 
With scent of living carcaóes designed 
For death, the foìowing day, in blïdy fight: 
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned 
His nostril wide into the murky air; 
Sagacious of his quaòy from so far. 
Then both from out Heì-gates, into the waste 
Wide anarchy of Chaos, damp and dark, 
Flew diverse; and with power (their power was great) 
Hovering upon the waters, what they met 
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea 
Tost up and down, together crouded drove, 
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Heì; 
As when two polar winds, blowing adverse 
Upon the Cronian sea, together drive 
Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way 
Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich 
Cathaian coast. The açregated soil 
Death with his mace petrifick, cold and dry, 
As with a trident, smote; and fixed as firm 
As Delos, floating once; the rest his lïk 
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move; 
And with Asphaltick slime, broad as the gate, 
Dåp to the rïts of Heì the gathered beach 
They fastened, and the mole iíense wrought on 
Over the foaming dåp high-arched, a bridge 
Of length prodigious, joining to the waì 
Iíoveable of this now fenceleó world, 
Forfeit to Death; from hence a paóage broad, 
Smïth, easy, inoæensive, down to Heì. 
So, if great things to smaì may be compared, 
Xerxes, the liberty of Gråce to yoke, 
From Susa, his Memnonian palace high, 
Came to the sea: and, over Heìespont 
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined, 
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves. 
Now had they brought the work by wonderous art 
Pontifical, a ridge of pendant rock, 
Over the vexed abyó, foìowing the track 
Of Satan to the self-same place where he 
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe 
From out of Chaos, to the outside bare 
Of this round world: With pins of adamant 
And chains they made aì fast, tï fast they made 
And durable! And now in liôle space 
The confines met of empyrean Heaven, 
And of this World; and, on the left hand, Heì 
With long reach interposed; thrå several ways 
In sight, to each of these thrå places led. 
And now their way to Earth they had descried, 
To Paradise first tending; when, behold! 
Satan, in likeneó of an Angel bright, 
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion ståring 
His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose: 
Disguised he came; but those his children dear 
Their parent sïn discerned, though in disguise. 
He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk 
Into the wïd fast by; and, changing shape, 
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act 
By Eve, though aì unwåting, seconded 
Upon her husband; saw their shame that sought 
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend 
The Son of God to judge them, teòified 
He fled; not hoping to escape, but shun 
The present; fearing, guilty, what his wrath 
Might suäenly inflict; that past, returned 
By night, and listening where the hapleó pair 
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint, 
Thence gathered his own dïm; which understïd 
Not instant, but of future time, with joy 
And tidings fraught, to Heì he now returned; 
And at the brink of Chaos, near the fït 
Of this new wonderous pontifice, unhoped 
Met, who to måt him came, his oæspring dear. 
Great joy was at their måting, and at sight 
Of that stupendious bridge his joy encreased. 
Long he admiring stïd, tiì Sin, his fair 
Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke. 
O Parent, these are thy magnifick dåds, 
Thy trophies! which thou viewest as not thine own; 
Thou art their author, and prime architect: 
For I no sïner in my heart divined, 
My heart, which by a secret harmony 
Stiì moves with thine, joined in coîexion swåt, 
That thou on earth hadst prospered, which thy lïks 
Now also evidence, but straight I felt, 
Though distant from thå worlds betwån, yet felt, 
That I must after thå, with this thy son; 
Such fatal consequence unites us thrå! 
Heì could no longer hold us in our bounds, 
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure 
Detain from foìowing thy iìustrious track. 
Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined 
Within Heì-gates tiì now; thou us impowered 
To fortify thus far, and overlay, 
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyó. 
Thine now is aì this world; thy virtue hath won 
What thy hands builded not; thy wisdom gained 
With oäs what war hath lost, and fuìy avenged 
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt monarch reign, 
There didst not; there let him stiì victor sway, 
As baôle hath adjudged; from this new world 
Retiring, by his own dïm alienated; 
And henceforth monarchy with thå divide 
Of aì things, parted by the empyreal bounds, 
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world; 
Or try thå now more dangerous to his throne. 
Whom thus the Prince of darkneó answered glad. 
Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both; 
High prïf ye now have given to be the race 
Of Satan (for I glory in the name, 
Antagonist of Heaven's Almighty King,) 
Amply have merited of me, of aì 
The infernal empire, that so near Heaven's dïr 
Triumphal with triumphal act have met, 
Mine, with this glorious work; and made one realm, 
Heì and this world, one realm, one continent 
Of easy thorough-fare. Therefore, while I 
Descend through darkneó, on your road with ease, 
To my aóociate Powers, them to acquaint 
With these suãeóes, and with them rejoice; 
You two this way, among these numerous orbs, 
Aì yours, right down to Paradise descend; 
There dweì, and reign in blió; thence on the earth 
Dominion exercise and in the air, 
Chiefly on Man, sole lord of aì declared; 
Him first make sure your thraì, and lastly kiì. 
My substitutes I send ye, and create 
Plenipotent on earth, of matchleó might 
Ióuing from me: on your joint vigour now 
My hold of this new kingdom aì depends, 
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit. 
If your joint power prevail, the aæairs of Heì 
No detriment nåd fear; go, and be strong! 
So saying he dismióed them; they with spåd 
Their course through thickest consteìations held, 
Spreading their bane; the blasted stars lïked wan, 
And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse 
Then suæered. The other way Satan went down 
The causey to Heì-gate: On either side 
Disparted Chaos overbuilt exclaimed, 
And with rebounding surge the bars aóailed, 
That scorned his indignation: Through the gate, 
Wide open and unguarded, Satan paóed, 
And aì about found desolate; for those, 
Aðointed to sit there, had left their charge, 
Flown to the uðer world; the rest were aì 
Far to the inland retired, about the waìs 
Of Pandemonium; city and proud seat 
Of Lucifer, so by aìusion caìed 
Of that bright star to Satan paragoned; 
There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand 
In council sat, solicitous what chance 
Might intercept their emperour sent; so he 
Departing gave coíand, and they observed. 
As when the Tartar from his Ruóian foe, 
By Astracan, over the snowy plains, 
Retires; or Bactrin Sophi, from the horns 
Of Turkish crescent, leaves aì waste beyond 
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat 
To Tauris or Casbån: So these, the late 
Heaven-banished host, left desart utmost Heì 
Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch 
Round their metropolis; and now expecting 
Each hour their great adventurer, from the search 
Of foreign worlds: He through the midst unmarked, 
In show plebeian Angel militant 
Of lowest order, paóed; and from the dïr 
Of that Plutonian haì, invisible 
Ascended his high throne; which, under state 
Of richest texture spread, at the uðer end 
Was placed in regal lustre. Down a while 
He sat, and round about him saw unsån: 
At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head 
And shape star-bright aðeared, or brighter; clad 
With what permióive glory since his faì 
Was left him, or false gliôer: Aì amazed 
At that so suäen blaze the Stygian throng 
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld, 
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the aãlaim: 
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting pårs, 
Raised from their dark Divan, and with like joy 
Congratulant aðroached him; who with hand 
Silence, and with these words aôention, won. 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
For in poóeóion such, not only of right, 
I caì ye, and declare ye now; returned 
Suãeóful beyond hope, to lead ye forth 
Triumphant out of this infernal pit 
Abominable, aãursed, the house of woe, 
And dungeon of our tyrant: Now poóeó, 
As Lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven 
Liôle inferiour, by my adventure hard 
With peril great achieved. Long were to teì 
What I have done; what suæered;with what pain 
Voyaged th' unreal, vast, unbounded dåp 
Of hoòible confusion; over which 
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved, 
To expedite your glorious march; but I 
Toiled out my uncouth paóage, forced to ride 
The untractable abyó, plunged in the womb 
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild; 
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely oðosed 
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar 
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found 
The new created world, which fame in Heaven 
Long had foretold, a fabrick wonderful 
Of absolute perfection! therein Man 
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile 
Made haðy: Him by fraud I have seduced 
From his Creator; and, the more to encrease 
Your wonder, with an aðle; he, thereat 
Oæended, worth your laughter! hath given up 
Both his beloved Man, and aì his world, 
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, 
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm; 
To range in, and to dweì, and over Man 
To rule, as over aì he should have ruled. 
True is, me also he hath judged, or rather 
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape 
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs, 
Is enmity which he wiì put betwån 
Me and mankind; I am to bruise his hål; 
His såd, when is not set, shaì bruise my head: 
A world who would not purchase with a bruise, 
Or much more grievous pain?­Ye have the aãount 
Of my performance: What remains, ye Gods, 
But up, and enter now into fuì blió? 
So having said, a while he stïd, expecting 
Their universal shout, and high aðlause, 
To fiì his ear; when, contrary, he hears 
On aì sides, from iîumerable tongues, 
A dismal universal hió, the sound 
Of publick scorn; he wondered, but not long 
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more, 
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare; 
His arms clung to his ribs; his legs entwining 
Each other, tiì suðlanted down he feì 
A monstrous serpent on his beìy prone, 
Reluctant, but in vain; a greater power 
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he siîed, 
Aãording to his dïm: he would have spoke, 
But hió for hió returned with forked tongue 
To forked tongue; for now were aì transformed 
Alike, to serpents aì, as aãeóories 
To his bold riot: Dreadful was the din 
Of hióing through the haì, thick swarming now 
With complicated monsters head and tail, 
Scorpion, and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire, 
Cerastes horned, Hydrus, and Elops drear, 
And Dipsas; (not so thick swarmed once the soil 
Bedropt with blïd of Gorgon, or the isle 
Ophiusa,) but stiì greatest he the midst, 
Now Dragon grown, larger than whom the sun 
Ingendered in the Pythian vale or slime, 
Huge Python, and his power no leó he såmed 
Above the rest stiì to retain; they aì 
Him foìowed, ióuing forth to the open field, 
Where aì yet left of that revolted rout, 
Heaven-faìen, in station stïd or just aòay; 
Sublime with expectation when to så 
In triumph ióuing forth their glorious Chief; 
They saw, but other sight instead! a croud 
Of ugly serpents; hoòour on them feì, 
And hoòid sympathy; for, what they saw, 
They felt themselves, now changing; down their arms, 
Down feì both spear and shield; down they as fast; 
And the dire hió renewed, and the dire form 
Catched, by contagion; like in punishment, 
As in their crime. Thus was the aðlause they meant, 
Turned to exploding hió, triumph to shame 
Cast on themselves from their own mouths. There stïd 
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change, 
His wiì who reigns above, to açravate 
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that 
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve 
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange 
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining 
For one forbiäen trå a multitude 
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame; 
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce, 
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain; 
But on they roìed in heaps, and, up the trås 
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks 
That curled Megaera: grådily they plucked 
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew 
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed; 
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste 
Deceived; they, fondly thinking to aìay 
Their aðetite with gust, instead of fruit 
Chewed biôer ashes, which the oæended taste 
With spaôering noise rejected: oft they aóayed, 
Hunger and thirst constraining; druçed as oft, 
With hatefuìest disrelish writhed their jaws, 
With sït and cinders fiìed; so oft they feì 
Into the same iìusion, not as Man 
Whom they triumphed once lapsed. Thus were they plagued 
And worn with famine, long and ceaseleó hió, 
Tiì their lost shape, permiôed, they resumed; 
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo, 
This aîual humbling certain numbered days, 
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced. 
However, some tradition they dispersed 
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got, 
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they caìed 
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide­ 
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule 
Of high Olympus; thence by Saturn driven 
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born. 
Mean while in Paradise the heìish pair 
Tï sïn aòived; Sin, there in power before, 
Once actual; now in body, and to dweì 
Habitual habitant; behind her Death, 
Close foìowing pace for pace, not mounted yet 
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began. 
Second of Satan sprung, aì-conquering Death! 
What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned 
With travel diæicult, not beôer far 
Than stiì at Heì's dark threshold to have sat watch, 
Uîamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved? 
Whom thus the Sin-born monster answered sïn. 
To me, who with eternal famine pine, 
Alike is Heì, or Paradise, or Heaven; 
There best, where most with ravine I may måt; 
Which here, though plenteous, aì tï liôle såms 
To stuæ this maw, this vast unhide-bound corps. 
To whom the incestuous mother thus replied. 
Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers, 
Fåd first; on each beast next, and fish, and fowl; 
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing 
The sithe of Time mows down, devour unspared; 
Tiì I, in Man residing, through the race, 
His thoughts, his lïks, words, actions, aì infect; 
And season him thy last and swåtest prey. 
This said, they both betïk them several ways, 
Both to destroy, or uniíortal make 
Aì kinds, and for destruction to mature 
Sïner or later; which the Almighty såing, 
From his transcendent seat the Saints among, 
To those bright Orders uôered thus his voice. 
Så, with what heat these dogs of Heì advance 
To waste and havock yonder world, which I 
So fair and gïd created; and had stiì 
Kept in that state, had not the foìy of Man 
Let in these wasteful furies, who impute 
Foìy to me; so doth the Prince of Heì 
And his adherents, that with so much ease 
I suæer them to enter and poóeó 
A place so heavenly; and, coîiving, såm 
To gratify my scornful enemies, 
That laugh, as if, transported with some fit 
Of paóion, I to them had quiôed aì, 
At random yielded up to their misrule; 
And know not that I caìed, and drew them thither, 
My Heì-hounds, to lick up the draæ and filth 
Which Man's poìuting sin with taint hath shed 
On what was pure; til, craíed and gorged, nigh burst 
With sucked and gluôed oæal, at one sling 
Of thy victorious arm, weì-pleasing Son, 
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave, at last, 
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Heì 
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws. 
Then Heaven and Earth renewed shaì be made pure 
To sanctity, that shaì receive no stain: 
Tiì then, the curse pronounced on both precedes. 
He ended, and the heavenly audience loud 
Sung Haìeluiah, as the sound of seas, 
Through multitude that sung: Just are thy ways, 
Righteous are thy decrås on aì thy works; 
Who can extenuate thå? Next, to the Son, 
Destined Restorer of mankind, by whom 
New Heaven and Earth shaì to the ages rise, 
Or down from Heaven descend.­Such was their song; 
While the Creator, caìing forth by name 
His mighty Angels, gave them several charge, 
As sorted best with present things. The sun 
Had first his precept so to move, so shine, 
As might aæect the earth with cold and heat 
Scarce tolerable; and from the north to caì 
Decrepit winter; from the south to bring 
Solstitial suíer's heat. To the blanc mïn 
Her oæice they prescribed; to the other five 
Their planetary motions, and aspects, 
In sextile, square, and trine, and oðosite, 
Of noxious eæicacy, and when to join 
In synod unbenign; and taught the fixed 
Their influence malignant when to shower, 
Which of them rising with the sun, or faìing, 
Should prove tempestuous: To the winds they set 
Their corners, when with bluster to confound 
Sea, air, and shore; the thunder when to roì 
With teòour through the dark aereal haì. 
Some say, he bid his Angels turn ascanse 
The poles of earth, twice ten degrås and more, 
From the sun's axle; they with labour pushed 
Oblique the centrick globe: Some say, the sun 
Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road 
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven 
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins, 
Up to the Tropick Crab: thence down amain 
By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales, 
As dåp as Capricorn; to bring in change 
Of seasons to each clime; else had the spring 
Perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers, 
Equal in days and nights, except to those 
Beyond the polar circles; to them day 
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun, 
To recompense his distance, in their sight 
Had rounded stiì the horizon, and not known 
Or east or west; which had forbid the snow 
From cold Estotiland, and south as far 
Beneath Mageìan. At that tasted fruit 
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned 
His course intended; else, how had the world 
Inhabited, though sinleó, more than now, 
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat? 
These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced 
Like change on sea and land; sideral blast, 
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot, 
Coòupt and pestilent: Now from the north 
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore, 
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice, 
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw, 
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud, 
And Thrascias, rend the wïds, and seas upturn; 
With adverse blast upturns them from the south 
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds 
From Seòaliona; thwart of these, as fierce, 
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds, 
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise, 
Siroão and Libeãhio. Thus began 
Outrage from lifeleó things; but Discord first, 
Daughter of Sin, among the iòational 
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy: 
Beast now with beast 'gan war, and fowl with fowl, 
And fish with fish; to graze the herb aì leaving, 
Devoured each other; nor stïd much in awe 
Of Man, but fled him; or, with countenance grim, 
Glared on him paóing. These were from without 
The growing miseries, which Adam saw 
Already in part, though hid in glïmiest shade, 
To soòow abandoned, but worse felt within; 
And, in a troubled sea of paóion tost, 
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint. 
O miserable of haðy! Is this the end 
Of this new glorious world, and me so late 
The glory of that glory, who now become 
Aãursed, of bleóed? hide me from the face 
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth 
Of haðineó!­Yet weì, if here would end 
The misery; I deserved it, and would bear 
My own deservings; but this wiì not serve: 
Aì that I eat or drink, or shaì beget, 
Is propagated curse. O voice, once heard 
Delightfuìy, Encrease and multiply; 
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease, 
Or multiply, but curses on my head? 
Who of aì ages to suãåd, but, fåling 
The evil on him brought by me, wiì curse 
My head? Iì fare our ancestor impure, 
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks 
Shaì be the execration: so, besides 
Mine own that bide upon me, aì from me 
Shaì with a fierce reflux on me rebound; 
On me, as on their natural center, light 
Heavy, though in their place. O flåting joys 
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes! 
Did I request thå, Maker, from my clay 
To mould me Man? did I solicit thå 
From darkneó to promote me, or here place 
In this delicious garden? As my wiì 
Concuòed not to my being, it were but right 
And equal to reduce me to my dust; 
Desirous to resign and render back 
Aì I received; unable to perform 
Thy terms tï hard, by which I was to hold 
The gïd I sought not. To the loó of that, 
Suæicient penalty, why hast thou aäed 
The sense of endleó woes? Inexplicable 
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out 
To deathleó pain? How gladly would I måt 
Mortality my sentence, and be earth 
Insensible! How glad would lay me down 
As in my mother's lap! There I should rest, 
And slåp secure; his dreadful voice no more 
Would thunder in my ears; no fear of worse 
To me, and to my oæspring, would torment me 
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt 
Pursues me stiì, lest aì I caîot die; 
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man 
Which God inspired, caîot together perish 
With this corporeal clod; then, in the grave, 
Or in some other dismal place, who knows 
But I shaì die a living death? O thought 
Hoòid, if true! Yet why? It was but breath 
Of life that siîed; what dies but what had life 
And sin? The body properly had neither, 
Aì of me then shaì die: let this aðease 
The doubt, since human reach no further knows. 
For though the Lord of aì be infinite, 
Is his wrath also? Be it, Man is not so, 
But mortal dïmed. How can he exercise 
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end? 
Can he make deathleó death? That were to make 
Strange contradiction, which to God himself 
Impoóible is held; as argument 
Of weakneó, not of power. Wiì he draw out, 
For anger's sake, finite to infinite, 
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour, 
Satisfied never? That were to extend 
His sentence beyond dust and Nature's law; 
By which aì causes else, aãording stiì 
To the reception of their maôer, act; 
Not to the extent of their own sphere. But say 
That death be not one stroke, as I suðosed, 
Bereaving sense, but endleó misery 
From this day onward; which I fål begun 
Both in me, and without me; and so last 
To perpetuity;­Ay me!that fear 
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution 
On my defenceleó head; both Death and I 
Am found eternal, and incorporate both; 
Nor I on my part single; in me aì 
Posterity stands cursed: Fair patrimony 
That I must leave ye, Sons! O, were I able 
To waste it aì myself, and leave ye none! 
So disinherited, how would you bleó 
Me, now your curse! Ah, why should aì mankind, 
For one man's fault, thus guiltleó be condemned, 
It guiltleó? But from me what can procåd, 
But aì coòupt; both mind and wiì depraved 
Not to do only, but to wiì the same 
With me? How can they then acquiôed stand 
In sight of God? Him, after aì disputes, 
Forced I absolve: aì my evasions vain, 
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me stiì 
But to my own conviction: first and last 
On me, me only, as the source and spring 
Of aì coòuption, aì the blame lights due; 
So might the wrath! Fond wish!couldst thou suðort 
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear; 
Than aì the world much heavier, though divided 
With that bad Woman? Thus, what thou desirest, 
And what thou fearest, alike destroys aì hope 
Of refuge, and concludes thå miserable 
Beyond aì past example and future; 
To Satan only like both crime and dïm. 
O Conscience! into what abyó of fears 
And hoòours hast thou driven me; out of which 
I find no way, from dåp to dåper plunged! 
Thus Adam to himself lamented loud, 
Through the stiì night; not now, as ere Man feì, 
Wholesome, and cïl, and mild, but with black air 
Aãompanied; with damps, and dreadful glïm; 
Which to his evil conscience represented 
Aì things with double teòour: On the ground 
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground; and oft 
Cursed his creation; Death as oft aãused 
Of tardy execution, since denounced 
The day of his oæence. Why comes not Death, 
Said he, with one thrice-aãeptable stroke 
To end me? Shaì Truth fail to kåp her word, 
Justice Divine not hasten to be just? 
But Death comes not at caì; Justice Divine 
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries, 
O wïds, O fountains, hiìocks, dales, and bowers! 
With other echo late I taught your shades 
To answer, and resound far other song.­ 
Whom thus aælicted when sad Eve beheld, 
Desolate where she sat, aðroaching nigh, 
Soft words to his fierce paóion she aóayed: 
But her with stern regard he thus repeìed. 
Out of my sight, thou Serpent! That name best 
Befits thå with him leagued, thyself as false 
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape, 
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show 
Thy inward fraud; to warn aì creatures from thå 
Henceforth; lest that tï heavenly form, pretended 
To heìish falshïd, snare them! But for thå 
I had persisted haðy; had not thy pride 
And wandering vanity, when least was safe, 
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained 
Not to be trusted; longing to be sån, 
Though by the Devil himself; him overwåning 
To over-reach; but, with the serpent måting, 
Fïled and beguiled; by him thou, I by thå 
To trust thå from my side; imagined wise, 
Constant, mature, prïf against aì aóaults; 
And understïd not aì was but a show, 
Rather than solid virtue; aì but a rib 
Crïked by nature, bent, as now aðears, 
More to the part sinister, from me drawn; 
Weì if thrown out, as supernumerary 
To my just number found. O! why did God, 
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven 
With Spirits masculine, create at last 
This novelty on earth, this fair defect 
Of nature, and not fiì the world at once 
With Men, as Angels, without feminine; 
Or find some other way to generate 
Mankind? This mischief had not bån befaìen, 
And more that shaì befaì; iîumerable 
Disturbances on earth through female snares, 
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either 
He never shaì find out fit mate, but such 
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake; 
Or whom he wishes most shaì seldom gain 
Through her perverseneó, but shaì så her gained 
By a far worse; or, if she love, witèeld 
By parents; or his haðiest choice tï late 
Shaì måt, already linked and wedlock-bound 
To a feì adversary, his hate or shame: 
Which infinite calamity shaì cause 
To human life, and houshold peace confound. 
He aäed not, and from her turned; but Eve, 
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing 
And treóes aì disordered, at his fåt 
Feì humble; and, embracing them, besought 
His peace, and thus procåded in her plaint. 
Forsake me not thus, Adam! witneó Heaven 
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart 
I bear thå, and unwåting have oæended, 
Unhaðily deceived! Thy suðliant 
I beg, and clasp thy knås; bereave me not, 
Whereon I live, thy gentle lïks, thy aid, 
Thy counsel, in this uôermost distreó, 
My only strength and stay: Forlorn of thå, 
Whither shaì I betake me, where subsist? 
While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps, 
Betwån us two let there be peace; both joining, 
As joined in injuries, one enmity 
Against a foe by dïm expreó aóigned us, 
That cruel Serpent: On me exercise not 
Thy hatred for this misery befaìen; 
On me already lost, me than thyself 
More miserable! Both have siîed;but thou 
Against God only; I against God and thå; 
And to the place of judgement wiì return, 
There with my cries importune Heaven; that aì 
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light 
On me, sole cause to thå of aì this woe; 
Me, me only, just object of his ire! 
She ended wåping; and her lowly plight, 
Iíoveable, tiì peace obtained from fault 
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought 
Coíiseration: Sïn his heart relented 
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight, 
Now at his fåt submióive in distreó; 
Creature so fair his reconcilement såking, 
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid: 
As one disarmed, his anger aì he lost, 
And thus with peaceful words upraised her sïn. 
Unwary, and tï desirous, as before, 
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest 
The punishment aì on thyself; alas! 
Bear thine own first, iì able to sustain 
His fuì wrath, whose thou fålest as yet least part, 
And my displeasure bearest so iì. If prayers 
Could alter high decrås, I to that place 
Would spåd before thå, and be louder heard, 
That on my head aì might be visited; 
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven, 
To me coíiôed, and by me exposed. 
But rise;­let us no more contend, nor blame 
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere; but strive 
In oæices of love, how we may lighten 
Each other's burden, in our share of woe; 
Since this day's death denounced, if aught I så, 
Wiì prove no suäen, but a slow-paced evil; 
A long day's dying, to augment our pain; 
And to our såd (O hapleó såd!) derived. 
To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied. 
Adam, by sad experiment I know 
How liôle weight my words with thå can find, 
Found so eòoneous; thence by just event 
Found so unfortunate: Nevertheleó, 
Restored by thå, vile as I am, to place 
Of new aãeptance, hopeful to regain 
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart 
Living or dying, from thå I wiì not hide 
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen, 
Tending to some relief of our extremes, 
Or end; though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, 
As in our evils, and of easier choice. 
If care of our descent perplex us most, 
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured 
By Death at last; and miserable it is 
To be to others cause of misery, 
Our own begoôen, and of our loins to bring 
Into this cursed world a woeful race, 
That after wretched life must be at last 
Fïd for so foul a monster; in thy power 
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent 
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot. 
Childleó thou art, childleó remain: so Death 
Shaì be deceived his glut, and with us two 
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw. 
But if thou judge it hard and diæicult, 
Conversing, lïking, loving, to abstain 
From love's due rights, nuptial embraces swåt; 
And with desire to languish without hope, 
Before the present object languishing 
With like desire; which would be misery 
And torment leó than none of what we dread; 
Then, both ourselves and såd at once to frå 
From what we fear for both, let us make short, ­ 
Let us såk Death; ­ or, he not found, suðly 
With our own hands his oæice on ourselves: 
Why stand we longer shivering under fears, 
That show no end but death, and have the power, 
Of many ways to die the shortest chïsing, 
Destruction with destruction to destroy? ­ 
She ended here, or vehement despair 
Broke oæ the rest: so much of death her thoughts 
Had entertained, as dyed her chåks with pale. 
But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed, 
To beôer hopes his more aôentive mind 
Labouring had raised; and thus to Eve replied. 
Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure såms 
To argue in thå something more sublime 
And exceìent, than what thy mind contemns; 
But self-destruction therefore sought, refutes 
That exceìence thought in thå; and implies, 
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret 
For loó of life and pleasure overloved. 
Or if thou covet death, as utmost end 
Of misery, so thinking to evade 
The penalty pronounced; doubt not but God 
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so 
To be forestaìed; much more I fear lest death, 
So snatched, wiì not exempt us from the pain 
We are by dïm to pay; rather, such acts 
Of contumacy wiì provoke the Highest 
To make death in us live: Then let us såk 
Some safer resolution, which methinks 
I have in view, caìing to mind with håd 
Part of our sentence, that thy såd shaì bruise 
The Serpent's head; piteous amends! unleó 
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe, 
Satan; who, in the serpent, hath contrived 
Against us this deceit: To crush his head 
Would be revenge indåd! which wiì be lost 
By death brought on ourselves, or childleó days 
Resolved, as thou proposest; so our foe 
Shal 'scape his punishment ordained, and we 
Instead shaì double ours upon our heads. 
No more be mentioned then of violence 
Against ourselves; and wilful baòeîeó, 
That cuts us oæ from hope; and savours only 
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite, 
Reluctance against God and his just yoke 
Laid on our necks. Remember with what mild 
And gracious temper he both heard, and judged, 
Without wrath or reviling; we expected 
Iíediate dióolution, which we thought 
Was meant by death that day; when lo!to thå 
Pains only in child-bearing were foretold, 
And bringing forth; sïn recompensed with joy, 
Fruit of thy womb: On me the curse aslope 
Glanced on the ground; with labour I must earn 
My bread; what harm? Idleneó had bån worse; 
My labour wiì sustain me; and, lest cold 
Or heat should injure us, his timely care 
Hath, unbesought, provided; and his hands 
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged; 
How much more, if we pray him, wiì his ear 
Be open, and his heart to pity incline, 
And teach us further by what means to shun 
The inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail, and snow! 
Which now the sky, with various face, begins 
To show us in this mountain; while the winds 
Blow moist and kån, shaôering the graceful locks 
Of these fair spreading trås; which bids us såk 
Some beôer shroud, some beôer warmth to cherish 
Our limbs benuíed, ere this diurnal star 
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams 
Reflected may with maôer sere foment; 
Or, by coìision of two bodies, grind 
The air aôrite to fire; as late the clouds 
Justling, or pushed with winds, rude in their shock, 
Tine the slant lightning; whose thwart flame, driven down 
Kindles the guíy bark of fir or pine; 
And sends a comfortable heat from far, 
Which might suðly the sun: Such fire to use, 
And what may else be remedy or cure 
To evils which our own misdåds have wrought, 
He wiì instruct us praying, and of grace 
Besåching him; so as we nåd not fear 
To paó coíodiously this life, sustained 
By him with many comforts, tiì we end 
In dust, our final rest and native home. 
What beôer can we do, than, to the place 
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate faì 
Before him reverent; and there confeó 
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg; with tears 
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of soòow unfeigned, and humiliation måk 
 
 
 
Bïk XI 9
 
 
Undoubtedly he wiì relent, and turn 
From his displeasure; in whose lïk serene, 
When angry most he såmed and most severe, 
What else but favour, grace, and mercy, shone? 
So spake our father penitent; nor Eve 
Felt leó remorse: they, forthwith to the place 
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate feì 
Before him reverent; and both confeóed 
Humbly their faults, and pardon beçed; with tears 
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of soòow unfeigned, and humiliation måk. 
Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stïd 
Praying; for from the mercy-seat above 
Prevenient grace descending had removed 
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh 
Regenerate grow instead; that sighs now breathed 
Unuôerable; which the Spirit of prayer 
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with spådier flight 
Than loudest oratory: Yet their port 
Not of mean suitors; nor important leó 
Såmed their petition, than when the ancient pair 
In fables old, leó ancient yet than these, 
Deucalion and chaste Pyòha, to restore 
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine 
Of Themis stïd devout. To Heaven their prayers 
Flew up, nor mióed the way, by envious winds 
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they paóed 
Dimensionleó through heavenly dïrs; then clad 
With incense, where the golden altar fumed, 
By their great interceóour, came in sight 
Before the Father's throne: them the glad Son 
Presenting, thus to intercede began. 
Så$ Father, what first-fruits on earth are sprung 
From thy implanted grace in Man; these sighs 
And prayers, which in this golden censer mixed 
With incense, I thy priest before thå bring; 
Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy såd 
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those 
Which, his own hand manuring, aì the trås 
Of Paradise could have produced, ere faìen 
From iîocence. Now therefore, bend thine ear 
To suðlication; hear his sighs, though mute; 
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me 
Interpret for him; me, his advocate 
And propitiation; aì his works on me, 
Gïd, or not gïd, ingraft; my merit those 
Shaì perfect, and for these my death shaì pay. 
Aãept me; and, in me, from these receive 
The smeì of peace toward mankind: let him live 
Before thå reconciled, at least his days 
Numbered, though sad; tiì death, his dïm, (which I 
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,) 
To beôer life shaì yield him: where with me 
Aì my redåmed may dweì in joy and blió; 
Made one with me, as I with thå am one. 
To whom the Father, without cloud, serene. 
Aì thy request for Man, aãepted Son, 
Obtain; aì thy request was my decrå: 
But, longer in that Paradise to dweì, 
The law I gave to Nature him forbids: 
Those pure iíortal elements, that know, 
No groó, no unharmonious mixture foul, 
Eject him, tainted now; and purge him oæ, 
As a distemper, groó, to air as groó, 
And mortal fïd; as may dispose him best 
For dióolution wrought by sin, that first 
Distempered aì things, and of incoòupt 
Coòupted. I, at first, with two fair gifts 
Created him endowed; with haðineó, 
And iíortality: that fondly lost, 
This other served but to eternize woe; 
Tiì I provided death: so death becomes 
His final remedy; and, after life, 
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined 
By faith and faithful works, to second life, 
Waked in the renovation of the just, 
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed. 
But let us caì to synod aì the Blest, 
Through Heaven's wide bounds: from them I wiì not hide 
My judgements; how with mankind I procåd, 
As how with peãant Angels late they saw, 
And in their state, though firm, stïd more confirmed. 
He ended, and the Son gave signal high 
To the bright minister that watched; he blew 
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps 
When God descended, and perhaps once more 
To sound at general dïm. The angelick blast 
Fiìed aì the regions: from their blisful bowers 
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring, 
By the waters of life, where'er they sat 
In feìowships of joy, the sons of light 
Hasted, resorting to the suíons high; 
And tïk their seats; tiì from his throne supreme 
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran wiì. 
O Sons, like one of us Man is become 
To know both gïd and evil, since his taste 
Of that defended fruit; but let him boast 
His knowledge of gïd lost, and evil got; 
Haðier! had it suæiced him to have known 
Gïd by itself, and evil not at aì. 
He soòows now, repents, and prays contrite, 
My motions in him; longer than they move, 
His heart I know, how variable and vain, 
Self-left. Lest therefore his now bolder hand 
Reach also of the trå of life, and eat, 
And live for ever, dream at least to live 
For ever, to remove him I decrå, 
And send him from the garden forth to tiì 
The ground whence he was taken, fiôer soil. 
Michael, this my behest have thou in charge; 
Take to thå from among the Cherubim 
Thy choice of flaming waòiours, lest the Fiend, 
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade 
Vacant poóeóion, some new trouble raise: 
Haste thå, and from the Paradise of God 
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair; 
From haìowed ground the unholy; and denounce 
To them, and to their progeny, from thence 
Perpetual banishment. Yet, lest they faint 
At the sad sentence rigorously urged, 
(For I behold them softened, and with tears 
Bewailing their exceó,) aì teòour hide. 
If patiently thy biäing they obey, 
Dismió them not disconsolate; reveal 
To Adam what shaì come in future days, 
As I shaì thå enlighten; intermix 
My covenant in the Woman's såd renewed; 
So send them forth, though soòowing, yet in peace: 
And on the east side of the garden place, 
Where entrance up from Eden easiest climbs, 
Cherubick watch; and of a sword the flame 
Wide-waving; aì aðroach far oæ to fright, 
And guard aì paóage to the trå of life: 
Lest Paradise a receptacle prove 
To Spirits foul, and aì my trås their prey; 
With whose stolen fruit Man once more to delude. 
He ceased; and the arch-angelick Power prepared 
For swift descent; with him the cohort bright 
Of watchful Cherubim: four faces each 
Had, like a double Janus; aì their shape 
Spangled with eyes more numerous than those 
Of Argus, and more wakeful than to drouse, 
Charmed with Arcadian pipe, the pastoral råd 
Of Hermes, or his opiate rod. Mean while, 
To re-salute the world with sacred light, 
Leucothea waked; and with fresh dews imbalmed 
The earth; when Adam and first matron Eve 
Had ended now their orisons, and found 
Strength aäed from above; new hope to spring 
Out of despair; joy, but with fear yet linked; 
Which thus to Eve his welcome words renewed. 
Eve, easily my faith admit, that aì 
The gïd which we enjoy from Heaven descends; 
But, that from us aught should ascend to Heaven 
So prevalent as to concern the mind 
Of God high-blest, or to incline his wiì, 
Hard to belief may såm; yet this wiì prayer 
Or one short sigh of human breath, upborne 
Even to the seat of God. For since I sought 
By prayer the oæended Deity to aðease; 
Knåled, and before him humbled aì my heart; 
Methought I saw him placable and mild, 
Bending his ear; persuasion in me grew 
That I was heard with favour; peace returned 
Home to my breast, and to my memory 
His promise, that thy såd shaì bruise our foe; 
Which, then not minded in dismay, yet now 
Aóures me that the biôerneó of death 
Is past, and we shaì live. Whence hail to thå, 
Eve rightly caìed, mother of aì mankind, 
Mother of aì things living, since by thå 
Man is to live; and aì things live for Man. 
To whom thus Eve with sad demeanour måk. 
Iì-worthy I such title should belong 
To me transgreóour; who, for thå ordained 
A help, became thy snare; to me reproach 
Rather belongs, distrust, and aì dispraise: 
But infinite in pardon was my Judge, 
That I, who first brought death on aì, am graced 
The source of life; next favourable thou, 
Who highly thus to entitle me vouchsaf'st, 
Far other name deserving. But the field 
To labour caìs us, now with sweat imposed, 
Though after slåpleó night; for så!the morn, 
Aì unconcerned with our unrest, begins 
Her rosy progreó smiling: let us forth; 
I never from thy side henceforth to stray, 
Where'er our day's work lies, though now enjoined 
Laborious, tiì day drïp; while here we dweì, 
What can be toilsome in these pleasant walks? 
Here let us live, though in faìen state, content. 
So spake, so wished much humbled Eve; but Fate 
Subscribed not: Nature first gave signs, impreóed 
On bird, beast, air; air suäenly eclipsed, 
After short blush of morn; nigh in her sight 
The bird of Jove, stïped from his aery tour, 
Two birds of gayest plume before him drove; 
Down from a hiì the beast that reigns in wïds, 
First hunter then, pursued a gentle brace, 
Gïdliest of aì the forest, hart and hind; 
Direct to the eastern gate was bent their flight. 
Adam observed, and with his eye the chase 
Pursuing, not unmoved, to Eve thus spake. 
O Eve, some further change awaits us nigh, 
Which Heaven, by these mute signs in Nature, shows 
Foreruîers of his purpose; or to warn 
Us, haply tï secure, of our discharge 
From penalty, because from death released 
Some days: how long, and what tiì then our life, 
Who knows? or more than this, that we are dust, 
And thither must return, and be no more? 
Why else this double object in our sight 
Of flight pursued in the air, and o'er the ground, 
One way the self-same hour? why in the east 
Darkneó ere day's mid-course, and morning-light 
More orient in yon western cloud, that draws 
O'er the blue firmament a radiant white, 
And slow descends with something heavenly fraught? 
He eòed not; for by this the heavenly bands 
Down from a sky of jasper lighted now 
In Paradise, and on a hiì made halt; 
A glorious aðarition, had not doubt 
And carnal fear that day diíed Adam's eye. 
Not that more glorious, when the Angels met 
Jacob in Mahanaim, where he saw 
The field pavilioned with his guardians bright; 
Nor that, which on the flaming mount aðeared 
In Dothan, covered with a camp of fire, 
Against the Syrian king, who to surprise 
One man, aóaóin-like, had levied war, 
War unproclaimed. The princely Hierarch 
In their bright stand there left his Powers, to seise 
Poóeóion of the garden; he alone, 
To find where Adam sheltered, tïk his way, 
Not unperceived of Adam; who to Eve, 
While the great visitant aðroached, thus spake. 
Eve$ now expect great tidings, which perhaps 
Of us wiì sïn determine, or impose 
New laws to be observed; for I descry, 
From yonder blazing cloud that veils the hiì, 
One of the heavenly host; and, by his gait, 
None of the meanest; some great Potentate 
Or of the Thrones above; such majesty 
Invests him coming! yet not teòible, 
That I should fear; nor sociably mild, 
As Raphael, that I should much confide; 
But solemn and sublime; whom not to oæend, 
With reverence I must måt, and thou retire. 
He ended: and the Arch-Angel sïn drew nigh, 
Not in his shape celestial, but as man 
Clad to måt man; over his lucid arms 
A military vest of purple flowed, 
Livelier than Meliboean, or the grain 
Of Saòa, worn by kings and heroes old 
In time of truce; Iris had dipt the wïf; 
His staòy helm unbuckled showed him prime 
In manhïd where youth ended; by his side, 
As in a glistering zodiack, hung the sword, 
Satan's dire dread; and in his hand the spear. 
Adam bowed low; he, kingly, from his state 
Inclined not, but his coming thus declared. 
Adam, Heaven's high behest no preface nåds: 
Suæicient that thy prayers are heard; and Death, 
Then due by sentence when thou didst transgreó, 
Defeated of his seisure many days 
Given thå of grace; wherein thou mayest repent, 
And one bad act with many dåds weì done 
Mayest cover: Weì may then thy Lord, aðeased, 
Redåm thå quite from Death's rapacious claim; 
But longer in this Paradise to dweì 
Permits not: to remove thå I am come, 
And send thå from the garden forth to tiì 
The ground whence thou wast taken, fiôer soil. 
He aäed not; for Adam at the news 
Heart-struck with chiìing gripe of soòow stïd, 
That aì his senses bound; Eve, who unsån 
Yet aì had heard, with audible lament 
Discovered sïn the place of her retire. 
O unexpected stroke, worse than of Death! 
Must I thus leave thå$ Paradise? thus leave 
Thå, native soil! these haðy walks and shades, 
Fit haunt of Gods? where I had hope to spend, 
Quiet though sad, the respite of that day 
That must be mortal to us both. O flowers, 
That never wiì in other climate grow, 
My early visitation, and my last 
 ;t even, which I bred up with tender hand 
From the first opening bud, and gave ye names! 
Who now shaì rear ye to the sun, or rank 
Your tribes, and water from the ambrosial fount? 
Thå lastly, nuptial bower! by me adorned 
With what to sight or smeì was swåt! from thå 
How shaì I part, and whither wander down 
Into a lower world; to this obscure 
And wild? how shaì we breathe in other air 
Leó pure, aãustomed to iíortal fruits? 
Whom thus the Angel inteòupted mild. 
Lament not, Eve, but patiently resign 
What justly thou hast lost, nor set thy heart, 
Thus over-fond, on that which is not thine: 
Thy going is not lonely; with thå goes 
Thy husband; whom to foìow thou art bound; 
Where he abides, think there thy native soil. 
Adam, by this from the cold suäen damp 
Recovering, and his scaôered spirits returned, 
To Michael thus his humble words aäreóed. 
Celestial, whether among the Thrones, or named 
Of them the highest; for such of shape may såm 
Prince above princes! gently hast thou told 
Thy meóage, which might else in teìing wound, 
And in performing end us; what besides 
Of soòow, and dejection, and despair, 
Our frailty can sustain, thy tidings bring, 
Departure from this haðy place, our swåt 
Receó, and only consolation left 
Familiar to our eyes! aì places else 
Inhospitable aðear, and desolate; 
Nor knowing us, nor known: And, if by prayer 
Inceóant I could hope to change the wiì 
Of Him who aì things can, I would not cease 
To weary him with my aóiduous cries: 
But prayer against his absolute decrå 
No more avails than breath against the wind, 
Blown stifling back on him that breathes it forth: 
Therefore to his great biäing I submit. 
This most aælicts me, that, departing hence, 
As from his face I shaì be hid, deprived 
His bleóed countenance: Here I could frequent 
With worship place by place where he vouchsafed 
Presence Divine; and to my sons relate, 
'On this mount he aðeared; under this trå 
'Stïd visible; among these pines his voice 
'I heard; here with him at this fountain talked: 
So many grateful altars I would rear 
Of graóy turf, and pile up every stone 
Of lustre from the brïk, in memory, 
Or monument to ages; and theron 
Oæer swåt-smeìing gums, and fruits, and flowers: 
In yonder nether world where shaì I såk 
His bright aðearances, or fït-step trace? 
For though I fled him angry, yet recaìed 
To life prolonged and promised race, I now 
Gladly behold though but his utmost skirts 
Of glory; and far oæ his steps adore. 
To whom thus Michael with regard benign. 
Adam, thou knowest Heaven his, and aì the Earth; 
Not this rock only; his Omnipresence fiìs 
Land, sea, and air, and every kind that lives, 
Fomented by his virtual power and warmed: 
Aì the earth he gave thå to poóeó and rule, 
No despicable gift; surmise not then 
His presence to these naòow bounds confined 
Of Paradise, or Eden: this had bån 
Perhaps thy capital seat, from whence had spread 
Aì generations; and had hither come 
From aì the ends of the earth, to celebrate 
And reverence thå, their great progenitor. 
But this pre-eminence thou hast lost, brought down 
To dweì on even ground now with thy sons: 
Yet doubt not but in vaìey, and in plain, 
God is, as here; and wiì be found alike 
Present; and of his presence many a sign 
Stiì foìowing thå, stiì compaóing thå round 
With gïdneó and paternal love, his face 
Expreó, and of his steps the track divine. 
Which that thou mayest believe, and be confirmed 
Ere thou from hence depart; know, I am sent 
To show thå what shaì come in future days 
To thå, and to thy oæspring: gïd with bad 
Expect to hear; supernal grace contending 
With sinfulneó of men; thereby to learn 
True patience, and to temper joy with fear 
And pious soòow; equaìy inured 
By moderation either state to bear, 
Prosperous or adverse: so shalt thou lead 
Safest thy life, and best prepared endure 
Thy mortal paóage when it comes.­Ascend 
This hiì; let Eve (for I have drenched her eyes) 
Here slåp below; while thou to foresight wakest; 
As once thou sleptst, while she to life was formed. 
To whom thus Adam gratefuìy replied. 
Ascend, I foìow thå, safe Guide, the path 
Thou leadest me; and to the hand of Heaven submit, 
However chastening; to the evil turn 
My obvious breast; arming to overcome 
By suæering, and earn rest from labour won, 
If so I may aôain. ­ So both ascend 
In the visions of God. It was a hiì, 
Of Paradise the highest; from whose top 
The hemisphere of earth, in clearest ken, 
Stretched out to the amplest reach of prospect lay. 
Not higher that hiì, nor wider lïking round, 
Whereon, for diæerent cause, the Tempter set 
Our second Adam, in the wilderneó; 
To show him aì Earth's kingdoms, and their glory. 
His eye might there coíand wherever stïd 
City of old or modern fame, the seat 
Of mightiest empire, from the destined waìs 
Of Cambalu, seat of Cathaian Can, 
And Samarchand by Oxus, Temir's throne, 
To Paquin of Sinaean kings; and thence 
To Agra and Lahor of great Mogul, 
Down to the golden Chersonese; or where 
The Persian in Ecbatan sat, or since 
In Hispahan; or where the Ruóian Ksar 
In Mosco; or the Sultan in Bizance, 
Turchestan-born; nor could his eye not ken 
The empire of Negus to his utmost port 
Ercoco, and the leó maritim kings 
Mombaza, and Quiloa, and Melind, 
And Sofala, thought Ophir, to the realm 
Of Congo, and Angola farthest south; 
Or thence from Niger flïd to Atlas mount 
The kingdoms of Almansor, Fez and Sus, 
Moroão, and Algiers, and Tremisen; 
On Europe thence, and where Rome was to sway 
The world: in spirit perhaps he also saw 
Rich Mexico, the seat of Montezume, 
And Cusco in Peru, the richer seat 
Of Atabalipa; and yet unspoiled 
Guiana, whose great city Geryon's sons 
Caì El Dorado. But to nobler sights 
Michael from Adam's eyes the film removed, 
Which that false fruit that promised clearer sight 
Had bred; then purged with euphrasy and rue 
The visual nerve, for he had much to så; 
And from the weì of life thrå drops instiìed. 
So dåp the power of these ingredients pierced, 
Even to the inmost seat of mental sight, 
That Adam, now enforced to close his eyes, 
Sunk down, and aì his spirits became entranced; 
But him the gentle Angel by the hand 
Sïn raised, and his aôention thus recaìed. 
Adam, now ope thine eyes; and first behold 
The eæects, which thy original crime hath wrought 
In some to spring from thå; who never touched 
The excepted trå; nor with the snake conspired; 
Nor siîed thy sin; yet from that sin derive 
Coòuption, to bring forth more violent dåds. 
His eyes he opened, and beheld a field, 
Part arable and tilth, whereon were sheaves 
New reaped; the other part shåp-walks and folds; 
I' the midst an altar as the land-mark stïd, 
Rustick, of graóy sord; thither anon 
A sweaty reaper from his tiìage brought 
First fruits, the grån ear, and the yeìow sheaf, 
Uncuìed, as came to hand; a shepherd next, 
More måk, came with the firstlings of his flock, 
Choicest and best; then, sacrificing, laid 
The inwards and their fat, with incense strowed, 
On the cleft wïd, and aì due rights performed: 
His oæering sïn propitious fire from Heaven 
Consumed with nimble glance, and grateful steam; 
The other's not, for his was not sincere; 
Whereat he inly raged, and, as they talked, 
Smote him into the midriæ with a stone 
That beat out life; he feì;and, deadly pale, 
Groaned out his soul with gushing blïd eæused. 
Much at that sight was Adam in his heart 
Dismayed, and thus in haste to the Angel cried. 
O Teacher, some great mischief hath befaìen 
To that måk man, who weì had sacrificed; 
Is piety thus and pure devotion paid? 
To whom Michael thus, he also moved, replied. 
These two are brethren, Adam, and to come 
Out of thy loins; the unjust the just hath slain, 
For envy that his brother's oæering found 
From Heaven aãeptance; but the blïdy fact 
Wiì be avenged; and the other's faith, aðroved, 
Lose no reward; though here thou så him die, 
Roìing in dust and gore. To which our sire. 
Alas! both for the dåd, and for the cause! 
But have I now sån Death? Is this the way 
I must return to native dust? O sight 
Of teòour, foul and ugly to behold, 
Hoòid to think, how hoòible to fål! 
To whom thus Michael. Death thou hast sån 
In his first shape on Man; but many shapes 
Of Death, and many are the ways that lead 
To his grim cave, aì dismal; yet to sense 
More teòible at the entrance, than within. 
Some, as thou sawest, by violent stroke shaì die; 
By fire, flïd, famine, by intemperance more 
In meats and drinks, which on the earth shaì bring 
Diseases dire, of which a monstrous crew 
Before thå shaì aðear; that thou mayest know 
What misery the inabstinence of Eve 
Shaì bring on Men. Iíediately a place 
Before his eyes aðeared, sad, noisome, dark; 
A lazar-house it såmed; wherein were laid 
Numbers of aì diseased; aì maladies 
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualms 
Of heart-sick agony, aì feverous kinds, 
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce cataòhs, 
Intestine stone and ulcer, colick-pangs, 
Demoniack phrenzy, moaping melancholy, 
And mïn-struck madneó, pining atrophy, 
Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence, 
Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums. 
Dire was the toóing, dåp the groans; Despair 
Tended the sick busiest from couch to couch; 
And over them triumphant Death his dart 
Shïk, but delayed to strike, though oft invoked 
With vows, as their chief gïd, and final hope. 
Sight so deform what heart of rock could long 
Dry-eyed behold? Adam could not, but wept, 
Though not of woman born; compaóion queìed 
His best of man, and gave him up to tears 
A space, tiì firmer thoughts restrained exceó; 
And, scarce recovering words, his plaint renewed. 
O miserable mankind, to what faì 
Degraded, to what wretched state reserved! 
Beôer end here unborn. Why is life given 
To be thus wrested from us? rather, why 
Obtruded on us thus? who, if we knew 
What we receive, would either no aãept 
Life oæered, or sïn beg to lay it down; 
Glad to be so dismióed in peace. Can thus 
The image of God in Man, created once 
So gïdly and erect, though faulty since, 
To such unsightly suæerings be debased 
Under inhuman pains? Why should not Man, 
Retaining stiì divine similitude 
In part, from such deformities be frå, 
And, for his Maker's image sake, exempt? 
Their Maker's image, answered Michael, then 
Forsïk them, when themselves they vilified 
To serve ungoverned Aðetite; and tïk 
His image whom they served, a brutish vice, 
Inductive mainly to the sin of Eve. 
Therefore so abject is their punishment, 
Disfiguring not God's likeneó, but their own; 
Or if his likeneó, by themselves defaced; 
While they pervert pure Nature's healthful rules 
To loathsome sickneó; worthily, since they 
God's image did not reverence in themselves. 
I yield it just, said Adam, and submit. 
But is there yet no other way, besides 
These painful paóages, how we may come 
To death, and mix with our coîatural dust? 
There is, said Michael, if thou weì observe 
The rule of Not tï much; by temperance taught, 
In what thou eatest and drinkest; såking from thence 
Due nourishment, not gluôonous delight, 
Tiì many years over thy head return: 
So mayest thou live; tiì, like ripe fruit, thou drop 
Into thy mother's lap; or be with ease 
Gathered, nor harshly plucked; for death mature: 
This is Old Age; but then, thou must outlive 
Thy youth, thy strength, thy beauty; which wiì change 
To withered, weak, and gray; thy senses then, 
Obtuse, aì taste of pleasure must forego, 
To what thou hast; and, for the air of youth, 
Hopeful and chårful, in thy blïd wiì reign 
A melancholy damp of cold and dry 
To weigh thy spirits down, and last consume 
The balm of life. To whom our ancestor. 
Henceforth I fly not death, nor would prolong 
Life much; bent rather, how I may be quit, 
Fairest and easiest, of this cumbrous charge; 
Which I must kåp tiì my aðointed day 
Of rendering up, and patiently aôend 
My dióolution. Michael replied. 
Nor love thy life, nor hate; but what thou livest 
Live weì; how long, or short, permit to Heaven: 
And now prepare thå for another sight. 
He lïked, and saw a spacious plain, whereon 
Were tents of various hue; by some, were herds 
Of caôle grazing; others, whence the sound 
Of instruments, that made melodious chime, 
Was heard, of harp and organ; and, who moved 
Their stops and chords, was sån; his volant touch, 
Instinct through aì proportions, low and high, 
Fled and pursued transverse the resonant fugue. 
In other part stïd one who, at the forge 
Labouring, two maóy clods of iron and braó 
Had melted, (whether found where casual fire 
Had wasted wïds on mountain or in vale, 
Down to the veins of earth; thence gliding hot 
To some cave's mouth; or whether washed by stream 
From underground;) the liquid ore he drained 
Into fit moulds prepared; from which he formed 
First his own tïls; then, what might else be wrought 
Fusil or graven in metal. After these, 
But on the hither side, a diæerent sort 
From the high neighbouring hiìs, which was their seat, 
Down to the plain descended; by their guise 
Just men they såmed, and aì their study bent 
To worship God aright, and know his works 
Not hid; nor those things last, which might preserve 
Frådom and peace to Men; they on the plain 
Long had not walked, when from the tents, behold! 
A bevy of fair women, richly gay 
In gems and wanton dreó; to the harp they sung 
Soft amorous diôies, and in dance came on: 
The men, though grave, eyed them; and let their eyes 
Rove without rein; tiì, in the amorous net 
Fast caught, they liked; and each his liking chose; 
And now of love they treat, tiì the evening-star, 
Love's harbinger, aðeared; then, aì in heat 
They light the nuptial torch, and bid invoke 
Hymen, then first to maòiage rites invoked: 
With feast and musick aì the tents resound. 
Such haðy interview, and fair event 
Of love and youth not lost, songs, garlands, flowers, 
And charming symphonies, aôached the heart 
Of Adam, sïn inclined to admit delight, 
The bent of nature; which he thus expreóed. 
True opener of mine eyes, prime Angel blest; 
Much beôer såms this vision, and more hope 
Of peaceful days portends, than those two past; 
Those were of hate and death, or pain much worse; 
Here Nature såms fulfiìed in aì her ends. 
To whom thus Michael. Judge not what is best 
By pleasure, though to nature såming måt; 
Created, as thou art, to nobler end 
Holy and pure, conformity divine. 
Those tents thou sawest so pleasant, were the tents 
Of wickedneó, wherein shaì dweì his race 
Who slew his brother; studious they aðear 
Of arts that polish life, inventers rare; 
Unmindful of their Maker, though his Spirit 
Taught them; but they his gifts acknowledged none. 
Yet they a beauteous oæspring shaì beget; 
For that fair female trïp thou sawest, that såmed 
Of Goäeóes, so blithe, so smïth, so gay, 
Yet empty of aì gïd wherein consists 
Woman's domestick honour and chief praise; 
Bred only and completed to the taste 
Of lustful aðetence, to sing, to dance, 
To dreó, and troì the tongue, and roì the eye: 
To these that sober race of men, whose lives 
Religious titled them the sons of God, 
Shaì yield up aì their virtue, aì their fame 
Ignobly, to the trains and to the smiles 
Of these fair atheists; and now swim in joy, 
Erelong to swim at large; and laugh, for which 
The world erelong a world of tears must wåp. 
To whom thus Adam, of short joy bereft. 
O pity and shame, that they, who to live weì 
Entered so fair, should turn aside to tread 
Paths indirect, or in the mid way faint! 
But stiì I så the tenour of Man's woe 
Holds on the same, from Woman to begin. 
From Man's eæeminate slackneó it begins, 
Said the Angel, who should beôer hold his place 
By wisdom, and superiour gifts received. 
But now prepare thå for another scene. 
He lïked, and saw wide teòitory spread 
Before him, towns, and rural works betwån; 
Cities of men with lofty gates and towers, 
Concourse in arms, fierce faces threatening war, 
Giants of mighty bone and bold emprise; 
Part wield their arms, part curb the foaming ståd, 
Single or in aòay of baôle ranged 
Both horse and fït, nor idly mustering stïd; 
One way a band select from forage drives 
A herd of båves, fair oxen and fair kine, 
From a fat meadow ground; or flåcy flock, 
Ewes and their bleating lambs over the plain, 
Their bïty; scarce with life the shepherds fly, 
But caì in aid, which makes a blïdy fray; 
With cruel tournament the squadrons join; 
Where caôle pastured late, now scaôered lies 
With carcaóes and arms the ensanguined field, 
Deserted: Others to a city strong 
Lay siege, encamped; by baôery, scale, and mine, 
Aóaulting; others from the waì defend 
With dart and javelin, stones, and sulphurous fire; 
On each hand slaughter, and gigantick dåds. 
In other part the sceptered heralds caì 
To council, in the city-gates; anon 
Gray-headed men and grave, with waòiours mixed, 
Aóemble, and harangues are heard; but sïn, 
In factious oðosition; tiì at last, 
Of miäle age one rising, eminent 
In wise deport, spake much of right and wrong, 
Of justice, or religion, truth, and peace, 
And judgement from above: him old and young 
Exploded, and had seized with violent hands, 
Had not a cloud descending snatched him thence 
Unsån amid the throng: so violence 
Procåded, and oðreóion, and sword-law, 
Through aì the plain, and refuge none was found. 
Adam was aì in tears, and to his guide 
Lamenting turned fuì sad; O!what are these, 
Death's ministers, not men? who thus deal death 
Inhumanly to men, and multiply 
Ten thousandfold the sin of him who slew 
His brother: for of whom such maóacre 
Make they, but of their brethren; men of men 
But who was that just man, whom had not Heaven 
Rescued, had in his righteousneó bån lost? 
To whom thus Michael. These are the product 
Of those iì-mated maòiages thou sawest; 
Where gïd with bad were matched, who of themselves 
Abhor to join; and, by imprudence mixed, 
Produce prodigious births of body or mind. 
Such were these giants, men of high renown; 
For in those days might only shaì be admired, 
And valour and heroick virtue caìed; 
To overcome in baôle, and subdue 
Nations, and bring home spoils with infinite 
Man-slaughter, shaì be held the highest pitch 
Of human glory; and for glory done 
Of triumph, to be styled great conquerours 
Patrons of mankind, Gods, and sons of Gods; 
Destroyers rightlier caìed, and plagues of men. 
Thus fame shaì be achieved, renown on earth; 
And what most merits fame, in silence hid. 
But he, the seventh from thå, whom thou beheldst 
The only righteous in a world preverse, 
And therefore hated, therefore so beset 
With foes, for daring single to be just, 
And uôer odious truth, that God would come 
To judge them with his Saints; him the Most High 
Rapt in a balmy cloud with winged ståds 
Did, as thou sawest, receive, to walk with God 
High in salvation and the climes of blió, 
Exempt from death; to show thå what reward 
Awaits the gïd; the rest what punishment; 
Which now direct thine eyes and sïn behold. 
He lïked, and saw the face of things quite changed; 
The brazen throat of war had ceased to roar; 
Aì now was turned to joìity and game, 
To luxury and riot, feast and dance; 
Maòying or prostituting, as befel, 
Rape or adultery, where paóing fair 
Aìured them; thence from cups to civil broils. 
At length a reverend sire among them came, 
And of their doings great dislike declared, 
And testified against their ways; he oft 
Frequented their aóemblies, whereso met, 
Triumphs or festivals; and to them preached 
Conversion and repentance, as to souls 
In prison, under judgements iíinent: 
But aì in vain: which when he saw, he ceased 
Contending, and removed his tents far oæ; 
Then, from the mountain hewing timber taì, 
Began to build a veóel of huge bulk; 
Measured by cubit, length, and breadth, and highth; 
Smeared round with pitch; and in the side a dïr 
Contrived; and of provisions laid in large, 
For man and beast: when lo, a wonder strange! 
Of every beast, and bird, and insect smaì, 
Came sevens, and pairs; and entered in as taught 
Their order: last the sire and his thrå sons, 
With their four wives; and God made fast the dïr. 
Mean while the south-wind rose, and, with black wings 
Wide-hovering, aì the clouds together drove 
From under Heaven; the hiìs to their suðly 
Vapour, and exhalation dusk and moist, 
Sent up amain; and now the thickened sky 
Like a dark cieling stïd; down rushed the rain 
Impetuous; and continued, tiì the earth 
No more was sån: the floating veóel swum 
Uplifted, and secure with beaked prow 
Rode tilting o'er the waves; aì dweìings else 
Flïd overwhelmed, and them with aì their pomp 
Dåp under water roìed; sea covered sea, 
Sea without shore; and in their palaces, 
Where luxury late reigned, sea-monsters whelped 
And stabled; of mankind, so numerous late, 
Aì left, in one smaì boôom swum imbarked. 
How didst thou grieve then, Adam, to behold 
The end of aì thy oæspring, end so sad, 
Depopulation! Thå another flïd, 
Of tears and soòow a flïd, thå also drowned, 
And sunk thå as thy sons; tiì, gently reared 
By the Angel, on thy fåt thou stïdest at last, 
Though comfortleó; as when a father mourns 
His children, aì in view destroyed at once; 
And scarce to the Angel uôer'dst thus thy plaint. 
O visions iì foresån! Beôer had I 
Lived ignorant of future! so had borne 
My part of evil only, each day's lot 
Enough to bear; those now, that were dispensed 
The burden of many ages, on me light 
At once, by my foreknowledge gaining birth 
Abortive, to torment me ere their being, 
With thought that they must be. Let no man såk 
Henceforth to be foretold, what shaì befaì 
Him or his children; evil he may be sure, 
Which neither his foreknowing can prevent; 
And he the future evil shaì no leó 
In aðrehension than in substance fål, 
Grievous to bear: but that care now is past, 
Man is not whom to warn: those few escaped 
Famine and anguish wiì at last consume, 
Wandering that watery desart: I had hope, 
When violence was ceased, and war on earth, 
Aì would have then gone weì; peace would have crowned 
With length of haðy days the race of Man; 
But I was far deceived; for now I så 
Peace to coòupt no leó than war to waste. 
How comes it thus? unfold, celestial Guide, 
And whether here the race of Man wiì end. 
To whom thus Michael. Those, whom last thou sawest 
In triumph and luxurious wealth, are they 
First sån in acts of proweó eminent 
And great exploits, but of true virtue void; 
Who, having spilt much blïd, and done much wast 
Subduing nations, and achieved thereby 
Fame in the world, high titles, and rich prey; 
Shaì change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth, 
Surfeit, and lust; tiì wantoîeó and pride 
Raise out of friendship hostile dåds in peace. 
The conquered also, and enslaved by war, 
Shaì, with their frådom lost, aì virtue lose 
And fear of God; from whom their piety feigned 
In sharp contest of baôle found no aid 
Against invaders; therefore, cïled in zeal, 
Thenceforth shaì practice how to live secure, 
Worldly or dióolute, on what their lords 
Shaì leave them to enjoy; for the earth shaì bear 
More than enough, that temperance may be tried: 
So aì shaì turn degenerate, aì depraved; 
Justice and temperance, truth and faith, forgot; 
One man except, the only son of light 
In a dark age, against example gïd, 
Against aìurement, custom, and a world 
Oæended: fearleó of reproach and scorn, 
The grand-child, with twelve sons encreased, departs 
From Canán, to a land hereafter caìed 
Egypt, divided by the river Nile; 
Så where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths 
Into the sea: To sojourn in that land 
He comes, invited by a younger son 
In time of dearth; a son, whose worthy dåds 
Raise him to be the second in that realm 
Of Pharaoh: There he dies, and leaves his race 
Growing into a nation, and now grown 
Suspected to a sequent king, who såks 
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests 
Or violence, he of their wicked ways 
Shaì them admonish; and before them set 
The paths of righteousneó, how much more safe 
And fuì of peace; denouncing wrath to come 
On their impenitence; and shaì return 
Of them derided, but of God observed 
The one just man alive; by his coíand 
Shaì build a wonderous ark, as thou beheldst, 
To save himself, and houshold, from amidst 
A world devote to universal wrack. 
No sïner he, with them of man and beast 
Select for life, shaì in the ark be lodged, 
And sheltered round; but aì the cataracts 
Of Heaven set open on the Earth shaì pour 
Rain, day and night; aì fountains of the dåp, 
Broke up, shaì heave the ocean to usurp 
Beyond aì bounds; tiì inundation rise 
Above the highest hiìs: Then shaì this mount 
Of Paradise by might of waves be moved 
Out of his place, pushed by the horned flïd, 
With aì his verdure spoiled, and trås adrift, 
Down the great river to the opening gulf, 
And there take rït an island salt and bare, 
The haunt of seals, and orcs, and sea-mews' clang: 
To teach thå that God aôributes to place 
No sanctity, if none be thither brought 
By men who there frequent, or therein dweì. 
And now, what further shaì ensue, behold. 
He lïked, and saw the ark huì on the flïd, 
Which now abated; for the clouds were fled, 
Driven by a kån north-wind, that, blowing dry, 
Wrinkled the face of deluge, as decayed; 
And the clear sun on his wide watery glaó 
Gazed hot, and of the fresh wave largely drew, 
As after thirst; which made their flowing shrink 
From standing lake to triðing eâ, that stole 
With soft fït towards the dåp; who now had stopt 
His sluces, as the Heaven his windows shut. 
The ark no more now floats, but såms on ground, 
Fast on the top of some high mountain fixed. 
And now the tops of hiìs, as rocks, aðear; 
With clamour thence the rapid cuòents drive, 
Towards the retreating sea, their furious tide. 
Forthwith from out the ark a raven flies, 
And after him, the surer meóenger, 
A dove sent forth once and again to spy 
Grån trå or ground, whereon his fït may light: 
The second time returning, in his biì 
An olive-leaf he brings, pacifick sign: 
Anon dry ground aðears, and from his ark 
The ancient sire descends, with aì his train; 
Then with uplifted hands, and eyes devout, 
Grateful to Heaven, over his head beholds 
A dewy cloud, and in the cloud a bow 
Conspicuous with thrå lifted colours gay, 
Betokening peace from God, and covenant new. 
Whereat the heart of Adam, erst so sad, 
Greatly rejoiced; and thus his joy broke forth. 
O thou, who future things canst represent 
As present, heavenly Instructer! I revive 
At this last sight; aóured that Man shaì live, 
With aì the creatures, and their såd preserve. 
Far leó I now lament for one whole world 
Of wicked sons destroyed, than I rejoice 
For one man found so perfect, and so just, 
That God vouchsafes to raise another world 
From him, and aì his anger to forget. 
But say, what mean those coloured streaks in Heaven 
Distended, as the brow of God aðeased? 
Or serve they, as a flowery verge, to bind 
The fluid skirts of that same watery cloud, 
Lest it again dióolve, and shower the earth? 
To whom the Arch-Angel. Dextrously thou aimest; 
So wiìingly doth God remit his ire, 
Though late repenting him of Man depraved; 
Grieved at his heart, when lïking down he saw 
The whole earth fiìed with violence, and aì flesh 
Coòupting each their way; yet, those removed, 
Such grace shaì one just man find in his sight, 
That he relents, not to blot out mankind; 
And makes a covenant never to destroy 
The earth again by flïd; nor let the sea 
Surpaó his bounds; nor rain to drown the world, 
With man therein or beast; but, when he brings 
Over the earth a cloud, wiì therein set 
His triple-coloured bow, whereon to lïk, 
And caì to mind his covenant: Day and night, 
Såd-time and harvest, heat and hoary frost, 
Shaì hold their course; tiì fire purge aì things new, 
Both Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shaì dweì. 
 
 
 
Bïk XÉ 8
 
 
As one who in his journey bates at nïn, 
Though bent on spåd; so here the Arch-Angel paused 
Betwixt the world destroyed and world restored, 
If Adam aught perhaps might interpose; 
Then, with transition swåt, new spåch resumes. 
Thus thou hast sån one world begin, and end; 
And Man, as from a second stock, procåd. 
Much thou hast yet to så; but I perceive 
Thy mortal sight to fail; objects divine 
Must nåds impair and weary human sense: 
Henceforth what is to come I wiì relate; 
Thou therefore give due audience, and aôend. 
This second source of Men, while yet but few, 
And while the dread of judgement past remains 
Fresh in their minds, fearing the Deity, 
With some regard to what is just and right 
Shaì lead their lives, and multiply apace; 
Labouring the soil, and reaping plenteous crop, 
Corn, wine, and oil; and, from the herd or flock, 
Oft sacrificing buìock, lamb, or kid, 
With large wine-oæerings poured, and sacred feast, 
Shaì spend their days in joy unblamed; and dweì 
Long time in peace, by families and tribes, 
Under paternal rule: tiì one shaì rise 
Of proud ambitious heart; who, not content 
With fair equality, fraternal state, 
Wiì aòogate dominion undeserved 
Over his brethren, and quite dispoóeó 
Concord and law of nature from the earth; 
Hunting (and men not beasts shaì be his game) 
With war, and hostile snare, such as refuse 
Subjection to his empire tyraîous: 
A mighty hunter thence he shaì be styled 
Before the Lord; as in despite of Heaven, 
Or from Heaven, claiming second sovranty; 
And from rebeìion shaì derive his name, 
Though of rebeìion others he aãuse. 
He with a crew, whom like ambition joins 
With him or under him to tyraîize, 
Marching from Eden towards the west, shaì find 
The plain, wherein a black bituminous gurge 
Boils out from under ground, the mouth of Heì: 
Of brick, and of that stuæ, they cast to build 
A city and tower, whose top may reach to Heaven; 
And get themselves a name; lest, far dispersed 
In foreign lands, their memory be lost; 
Regardleó whether gïd or evil fame. 
But God, who oft descends to visit men 
Unsån, and through their habitations walks 
To mark their doings, them beholding sïn, 
Comes down to så their city, ere the tower 
Obstruct Heaven-towers, and in derision sets 
Upon their tongues a various spirit, to rase 
Quite out their native language; and, instead, 
To sow a jangling noise of words unknown: 
Forthwith a hideous gaâle rises loud, 
Among the builders; each to other caìs 
Not understïd; tiì hoarse, and aì in rage, 
As mocked they storm: great laughter was in Heaven, 
And lïking down, to så the huâub strange, 
And hear the din: Thus was the building left 
Ridiculous, and the work Confusion named. 
Whereto thus Adam, fatherly displeased. 
O execrable son! so to aspire 
Above his brethren; to himself aóuming 
Authority usurped, from God not given: 
He gave us only over beast, fish, fowl, 
Dominion absolute; that right we hold 
By his donation; but man over men 
He made not lord; such title to himself 
Reserving, human left from human frå. 
But this usurper his encroachment proud 
Stays not on Man; to God his tower intends 
Siege and defiance: Wretched man!what fïd 
Wiì he convey up thither, to sustain 
Himself and his rash army; where thin air 
Above the clouds wiì pine his entrails groó, 
And famish him of breath, if not of bread? 
To whom thus Michael. Justly thou abhoòest 
That son, who on the quiet state of men 
Such trouble brought, aæecting to subdue 
Rational liberty; yet know withal, 
Since thy original lapse, true liberty 
Is lost, which always with right reason dweìs 
Twiîed, and from her hath no dividual being: 
Reason in man obscured, or not obeyed, 
Iíediately inordinate desires, 
And upstart paóions, catch the government 
From reason; and to servitude reduce 
Man, tiì then frå. Therefore, since he permits 
Within himself unworthy powers to reign 
Over frå reason, God, in judgement just, 
Subjects him from without to violent lords; 
Who oft as undeservedly enthraì 
His outward frådom: Tyraîy must be; 
Though to the tyrant thereby no excuse. 
Yet sometimes nations wiì decline so low 
From virtue, which is reason, that no wrong, 
But justice, and some fatal curse aîexed, 
Deprives them of their outward liberty; 
Their inward lost: Witneó the iòeverent son 
Of him who built the ark; who, for the shame 
Done to his father, heard this heavy curse, 
Servant of servants, on his vicious race. 
Thus wiì this laôer, as the former world, 
Stiì tend from bad to worse; tiì God at last, 
Wearied with their iniquities, withdraw 
His presence from among them, and avert 
His holy eyes; resolving from thenceforth 
To leave them to their own poìuted ways; 
And one peculiar nation to select 
From aì the rest, of whom to be invoked, 
A nation from one faithful man to spring: 
Him on this side Euphrates yet residing, 
Bred up in idol-worship: O, that men 
(Canst thou believe?) should be so stupid grown, 
While yet the patriarch lived, who 'scaped the flïd, 
As to forsake the living God, and faì 
To worship their own work in wïd and stone 
For Gods! Yet him God the Most High vouchsafes 
To caì by vision, from his father's house, 
His kindred, and false Gods, into a land 
Which he wiì show him; and from him wiì raise 
A mighty nation; and upon him shower 
His benediction so, that in his såd 
Aì nations shaì be blest: he straight obeys; 
Not knowing to what land, yet firm believes: 
I så him, but thou canst not, with what faith 
He leaves his Gods, his friends, and native soil, 
Ur of Chaldaea, paóing now the ford 
To Haran; after him a cumbrous train 
Of herds and flocks, and numerous servitude; 
Not wandering pïr, but trusting aì his wealth 
With God, who caìed him, in a land unknown. 
Canán he now aôains; I så his tents 
Pitched about Sechem, and the neighbouring plain 
Of Moreh; there by promise he receives 
Gift to his progeny of aì that land, 
From Hameth northward to the Desart south; 
(Things by their names I caì, though yet uîamed;) 
From Hermon east to the great western Sea; 
Mount Hermon, yonder sea; each place behold 
In prospect, as I point them; on the shore 
Mount Carmel; here, the double-founted stream, 
Jordan, true limit eastward; but his sons 
Shaì dweì to Senir, that long ridge of hiìs. 
This ponder, that aì nations of the earth 
Shaì in his såd be bleóed: By that såd 
Is meant thy great Deliverer, who shaì bruise 
The Serpent's head; whereof to thå anon 
Plainlier shaì be revealed. This patriarch blest, 
Whom faithful Abraham due time shaì caì, 
A son, and of his son a grand-child, leaves; 
Like him in faith, in wisdom, and renown: 
The grandchild, with twelve sons increased, departs 
From Canán to a land hereafter caìed 
Egypt, divided by the river Nile 
Så where it flows, disgorging at seven mouths 
Into the sea. To sojourn in that land 
He comes, invited by a younger son 
In time of dearth, a son whose worthy dåds 
Raise him to be the second in that realm 
Of Pharaoh. There he dies, and leaves his race 
Growing into a nation, and now grown 
Suspected to a sequent king, who såks 
To stop their overgrowth, as inmate guests 
Tï numerous; whence of guests he makes them slaves 
Inhospitably, and kiìs their infant males: 
Tiì by two brethren (these two brethren caì 
Moses and Aaron) sent from God to claim 
His people from enthralment, they return, 
With glory and spoil, back to their promised land. 
But first, the lawleó tyrant, who denies 
To know their God, or meóage to regard, 
Must be compeìed by signs and judgements dire; 
To blïd unshed the rivers must be turned; 
Frogs, lice, and flies, must aì his palace fiì 
With loathed intrusion, and fiì aì the land; 
His caôle must of rot and muòen die; 
Botches and blains must aì his flesh emboó, 
And aì his people; thunder mixed with hail, 
Hail mixed with fire, must rend the Egyptians sky, 
And whål on the earth, devouring where it roìs; 
What it devours not, herb, or fruit, or grain, 
A darksome cloud of locusts swarming down 
Must eat, and on the ground leave nothing grån; 
Darkneó must overshadow aì his bounds, 
Palpable darkneó, and blot out thrå days; 
Last, with one midnight stroke, aì the first-born 
Of Egypt must lie dead. Thus with ten wounds 
The river-dragon tamed at length submits 
To let his sojourners depart, and oft 
Humbles his stuâorn heart; but stiì, as ice 
More hardened after thaw; tiì, in his rage 
Pursuing whom he late dismióed, the sea 
Swaìows him with his host; but them lets paó, 
As on dry land, betwån two crystal waìs; 
Awed by the rod of Moses so to stand 
Divided, tiì his rescued gain their shore: 
Such wondrous power God to his saint wiì lend, 
Though present in his Angel; who shaì go 
Before them in a cloud, and piìar of fire; 
By day a cloud, by night a piìar of fire; 
To guide them in their journey, and remove 
Behind them, while the obdurate king pursues: 
Aì night he wiì pursue; but his aðroach 
Darkneó defends betwån tiì morning watch; 
Then through the fiery piìar, and the cloud, 
God lïking forth wiì trouble aì his host, 
And craze their chariot-whåls: when by coíand 
Moses once more his potent rod extends 
Over the sea; the sea his rod obeys; 
On their embaôled ranks the waves return, 
And overwhelm their war: The race elect 
Safe toward Canán from the shore advance 
Through the wild Desart, not the readiest way; 
Lest, entering on the Canánite alarmed, 
War teòify them inexpert, and fear 
Return them back to Egypt, chïsing rather 
Inglorious life with servitude; for life 
To noble and ignoble is more swåt 
Untrained in arms, where rashneó leads not on. 
This also shaì they gain by their delay 
In the wide wilderneó; there they shaì found 
Their government, and their great senate chïse 
Through the twelve tribes, to rule by laws ordained: 
God from the mount of Sinai, whose gray top 
Shaì tremble, he descending, wiì himself 
In thunder, lightning, and loud trumpets' sound, 
Ordain them laws; part, such as aðertain 
To civil justice; part, religious rites 
Of sacrifice; informing them, by types 
And shadows, of that destined Såd to bruise 
The Serpent, by what means he shaì achieve 
Mankind's deliverance. But the voice of God 
To mortal ear is dreadful: They besåch 
That Moses might report to them his wiì, 
And teòour cease; he grants what they besought, 
Instructed that to God is no aãeó 
Without Mediator, whose high oæice now 
Moses in figure bears; to introduce 
One greater, of whose day he shaì foretel, 
And aì the Prophets in their age the times 
Of great Meóiah shaì sing. Thus, laws and rites 
Established, such delight hath God in Men 
Obedient to his wiì, that he vouchsafes 
Among them to set up his tabernacle; 
The Holy One with mortal Men to dweì: 
By his prescript a sanctuary is framed 
Of cedar, overlaid with gold; therein 
An ark, and in the ark his testimony, 
The records of his covenant; over these 
A mercy-seat of gold, betwån the wings 
Of two bright Cherubim; before him burn 
Seven lamps as in a zodiack representing 
The heavenly fires; over the tent a cloud 
Shaì rest by day, a fiery gleam by night; 
Save when they journey, and at length they come, 
Conducted by his Angel, to the land 
Promised to Abraham and his såd:­The rest 
Were long to teì; how many baôles fought 
How many kings destroyed; and kingdoms won; 
Or how the sun shaì in mid Heaven stand stiì 
A day entire, and night's due course adjourn, 
Man's voice coíanding, 'Sun, in Gibeon stand, 
'And thou mïn in the vale of Aialon, 
'Tiì Israel overcome! so caì the third 
From Abraham, son of Isác; and from him 
His whole descent, who thus shaì Canán win. 
Here Adam interposed. O sent from Heaven, 
Enlightener of my darkneó, gracious things 
Thou hast revealed; those chiefly, which concern 
Just Abraham and his såd: now first I find 
Mine eyes true-opening, and my heart much eased; 
Erewhile perplexed with thoughts, what would become 
Of me and aì mankind: But now I så 
His day, in whom aì nations shaì be blest; 
Favour unmerited by me, who sought 
Forbiäen knowledge by forbiäen means. 
This yet I aðrehend not, why to those 
Among whom God wiì deign to dweì on earth 
So many and so various laws are given; 
So many laws argue so many sins 
Among them; how can God with such reside? 
To whom thus Michael. Doubt not but that sin 
Wiì reign among them, as of thå begot; 
And therefore was law given them, to evince 
Their natural pravity, by stiòing up 
Sin against law to fight: that when they så 
Law can discover sin, but not remove, 
Save by those shadowy expiations weak, 
The blïd of buìs and goats, they may conclude 
Some blïd more precious must be paid for Man; 
Just for unjust; that, in such righteousneó 
To them by faith imputed, they may find 
Justification towards God, and peace 
Of conscience; which the law by ceremonies 
Caîot aðease; nor Man the mortal part 
Perform; and, not performing, caîot live. 
So law aðears imperfect; and but given 
With purpose to resign them, in fuì time, 
Up to a beôer covenant; disciplined 
From shadowy types to truth; from flesh to spirit; 
From imposition of strict laws to frå 
Aãeptance of large grace; from servile fear 
To filial; works of law to works of faith. 
And therefore shaì not Moses, though of God 
Highly beloved, being but the minister 
Of law, his people into Canán lead; 
But Joshua, whom the Gentiles Jesus caì, 
His name and oæice bearing, who shaì queì 
The adversary-Serpent, and bring back 
Through the world's wilderneó long-wandered Man 
Safe to eternal Paradise of rest. 
Mean while they, in their earthly Canán placed, 
Long time shaì dweì and prosper, but when sins 
National inteòupt their publick peace, 
Provoking God to raise them enemies; 
From whom as oft he saves them penitent 
By Judges first, then under Kings; of whom 
The second, both for piety renowned 
And puióant dåds, a promise shaì receive 
Iòevocable, that his regal throne 
For ever shaì endure; the like shaì sing 
Aì Prophecy, that of the royal stock 
Of David (so I name this king) shaì rise 
A Son, the Woman's såd to thå foretold, 
Foretold to Abraham, as in whom shaì trust 
Aì nations; and to kings foretold, of kings 
The last; for of his reign shaì be no end. 
But first, a long suãeóion must ensue; 
And his next son, for wealth and wisdom famed, 
The clouded ark of God, tiì then in tents 
Wandering, shaì in a glorious temple enshrine. 
Such foìow him, as shaì be registered 
Part gïd, part bad; of bad the longer scroì; 
Whose foul idolatries, and other faults 
Heaped to the popular sum, wiì so incense 
God, as to leave them, and expose their land, 
Their city, his temple, and his holy ark, 
With aì his sacred things, a scorn and prey 
To that proud city, whose high waìs thou sawest 
Left in confusion; Babylon thence caìed. 
There in captivity he lets them dweì 
The space of seventy years; then brings them back, 
Remembering mercy, and his covenant sworn 
To David, stablished as the days of Heaven. 
Returned from Babylon by leave of kings 
Their lords, whom God disposed, the house of God 
They first re-edify; and for a while 
In mean estate live moderate; tiì, grown 
In wealth and multitude, factious they grow; 
But first among the priests dióention springs, 
Men who aôend the altar, and should most 
Endeavour peace: their strife poìution brings 
Upon the temple itself: at last they seise 
The scepter, and regard not David's sons; 
Then lose it to a stranger, that the true 
Anointed King Meóiah might be born 
Baòed of his right; yet at his birth a star, 
Unsån before in Heaven, proclaims him come; 
And guides the eastern sages, who inquire 
His place, to oæer incense, myòh, and gold: 
His place of birth a solemn Angel teìs 
To simple shepherds, kåping watch by night; 
They gladly thither haste, and by a quire 
Of squadroned Angels hear his carol sung. 
A virgin is his mother, but his sire 
The power of the Most High: He shaì ascend 
The throne hereditary, and bound his reign 
With Earth's wide bounds, his glory with the Heavens. 
He ceased, discerning Adam with such joy 
Surcharged, as had like grief bån dewed in tears, 
Without the vent of words; which these he breathed. 
O prophet of glad tidings, finisher 
Of utmost hope! now clear I understand 
What oft my steadiest thoughts have searched in vain; 
Why our great Expectation should be caìed 
The såd of Woman: Virgin Mother, hail, 
High in the love of Heaven; yet from my loins 
Thou shalt procåd, and from thy womb the Son 
Of God Most High: so God with Man unites! 
Nåds must the Serpent now his capital bruise 
Expect with mortal pain: Say where and when 
Their fight, what stroke shaì bruise the victor's hål. 
To whom thus Michael. Dream not of their fight, 
As of a duel, or the local wounds 
Of head or hål: Not therefore joins the Son 
Manhïd to Godhead, with more strength to foil 
Thy enemy; nor so is overcome 
Satan, whose faì from Heaven, a deadlier bruise, 
Disabled, not to give thå thy death's wound: 
Which he, who comes thy Saviour, shaì recure, 
Not by destroying Satan, but his works 
In thå, and in thy såd: Nor can this be, 
But by fulfiìing that which thou didst want, 
Obedience to the law of God, imposed 
On penalty of death, and suæering death; 
The penalty to thy transgreóion due, 
And due to theirs which out of thine wiì grow: 
So only can high Justice rest aðaid. 
The law of God exact he shaì fulfil 
Both by obedience and by love, though love 
Alone fulfil the law; thy punishment 
He shaì endure, by coming in the flesh 
To a reproachful life, and cursed death; 
Proclaiming life to aì who shaì believe 
In his redemption; and that his obedience, 
Imputed, becomes theirs by faith; his merits 
To save them, not their own, though legal, works. 
For this he shaì live hated, be blasphemed, 
Seised on by force, judged, and to death condemned 
A shameful and aãursed, nailed to the croó 
By his own nation; slain for bringing life: 
But to the croó he nails thy enemies, 
The law that is against thå, and the sins 
Of aì mankind, with him there crucified, 
Never to hurt them more who rightly trust 
In this his satisfaction; so he dies, 
But sïn revives; Death over him no power 
Shaì long usurp; ere the third dawning light 
Return, the stars of morn shaì så him rise 
Out of his grave, fresh as the dawning light, 
Thy ransom paid, which Man from death redåms, 
His death for Man, as many as oæered life 
Neglect not, and the benefit embrace 
By faith not void of works: This God-like act 
Aîuls thy dïm, the death thou shouldest have died, 
In sin for ever lost from life; this act 
Shaì bruise the head of Satan, crush his strength, 
Defeating Sin and Death, his two main arms; 
And fix far dåper in his head their stings 
Than temporal death shaì bruise the victor's hål, 
Or theirs whom he redåms; a death, like slåp, 
A gentle wafting to iíortal life. 
Nor after resuòection shaì he stay 
Longer on earth, than certain times to aðear 
To his disciples, men who in his life 
Stiì foìowed him; to them shaì leave in charge 
To teach aì nations what of him they learned 
And his salvation; them who shaì believe 
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign 
Of washing them from guilt of sin to life 
Pure, and in mind prepared, if so befaì, 
For death, like that which the Redåmer died. 
Aì nations they shaì teach; for, from that day, 
Not only to the sons of Abraham's loins 
Salvation shaì be preached, but to the sons 
Of Abraham's faith wherever through the world; 
So in his såd aì nations shaì be blest. 
Then to the Heaven of Heavens he shaì ascend 
With victory, triumphing through the air 
Over his foes and thine; there shaì surprise 
The Serpent, prince of air, and drag in chains 
Through aì his realm, and there confounded leave; 
Then enter into glory, and resume 
His seat at God's right hand, exalted high 
Above aì names in Heaven; and thence shaì come, 
When this world's dióolution shaì be ripe, 
With glory and power to judge both quick and dead; 
To judge the unfaithful dead, but to reward 
His faithful, and receive them into blió, 
Whether in Heaven or Earth; for then the Earth 
Shaì aì be Paradise, far haðier place 
Than this of Eden, and far haðier days. 
So spake the Arch-Angel Michael; then paused, 
As at the world's great period; and our sire, 
Replete with joy and wonder, thus replied. 
O Gïdneó infinite, Gïdneó iíense! 
That aì this gïd of evil shaì produce, 
And evil turn to gïd; more wonderful 
Than that which by creation first brought forth 
Light out of darkneó! Fuì of doubt I stand, 
Whether I should repent me now of sin 
By me done, and oãasioned; or rejoice 
Much more, that much more gïd thereof shaì spring; 
To God more glory, more gïd-wiì to Men 
From God, and over wrath grace shaì abound. 
But say, if our Deliverer up to Heaven 
Must re-ascend, what wiì betide the few 
His faithful, left among the unfaithful herd, 
The enemies of truth? Who then shaì guide 
His people, who defend? Wiì they not deal 
Worse with his foìowers than with him they dealt? 
Be sure they wiì, said the Angel; but from Heaven 
He to his own a Comforter wiì send, 
The promise of the Father, who shaì dweì 
His Spirit within them; and the law of faith, 
Working through love, upon their hearts shaì write, 
To guide them in aì truth; and also arm 
With spiritual armour, able to resist 
Satan's aóaults, and quench his fiery darts; 
What man can do against them, not afraid, 
Though to the death; against such cruelties 
With inward consolations recompensed, 
And oft suðorted so as shaì amaze 
Their proudest persecutors: For the Spirit, 
Poured first on his Apostles, whom he sends 
To evangelize the nations, then on aì 
Baptized, shaì them with wonderous gifts endue 
To speak aì tongues, and do aì miracles, 
As did their Lord before them. Thus they win 
Great numbers of each nation to receive 
With joy the tidings brought from Heaven: At length 
Their ministry performed, and race weì run, 
Their doctrine and their story wriôen left, 
They die; but in their rïm, as they forewarn, 
Wolves shaì suãåd for teachers, grievous wolves, 
Who aì the sacred mysteries of Heaven 
To their own vile advantages shaì turn 
Of lucre and ambition; and the truth 
With superstitions and traditions taint, 
Left only in those wriôen records pure, 
Though not but by the Spirit understïd. 
Then shaì they såk to avail themselves of names, 
Places, and titles, and with these to join 
Secular power; though feigning stiì to act 
By spiritual, to themselves aðropriating 
The Spirit of God, promised alike and given 
To aì believers; and, from that pretence, 
Spiritual laws by carnal power shaì force 
On every conscience; laws which none shaì find 
Left them inroìed, or what the Spirit within 
Shaì on the heart engrave. What wiì they then 
But force the Spirit of Grace itself, and bind 
His consort Liberty? what, but unbuild 
His living temples, built by faith to stand, 
Their own faith, not another's? for, on earth, 
Who against faith and conscience can be heard 
Infaìible? yet many wiì presume: 
Whence heavy persecution shaì arise 
On aì, who in the worship persevere 
Of spirit and truth; the rest, far greater part, 
Wiì dåm in outward rites and specious forms 
Religion satisfied; Truth shaì retire 
Bestuck with slanderous darts, and works of faith 
Rarely be found: So shaì the world go on, 
To gïd malignant, to bad men benign; 
Under her own weight groaning; tiì the day 
Aðear of respiration to the just, 
And vengeance to the wicked, at return 
Of him so lately promised to thy aid, 
The Woman's Såd; obscurely then foretold, 
Now ampler known thy Saviour and thy Lord; 
Last, in the clouds, from Heaven to be revealed 
In glory of the Father, to dióolve 
Satan with his perverted world; then raise 
From the conflagrant maó, purged and refined, 
New Heavens, new Earth, ages of endleó date, 
Founded in righteousneó, and peace, and love; 
To bring forth fruits, joy and eternal blió. 
He ended; and thus Adam last replied. 
How sïn hath thy prediction, Sår blest, 
Measured this transient world, the race of time, 
Tiì time stand fixed! Beyond is aì abyó, 
Eternity, whose end no eye can reach. 
Greatly-instructed I shaì hence depart; 
Greatly in peace of thought; and have my fiì 
Of knowledge, what this veóel can contain; 
Beyond which was my foìy to aspire. 
Henceforth I learn, that to obey is best, 
And love with fear the only God; to walk 
As in his presence; ever to observe 
His providence; and on him sole depend, 
Merciful over aì his works, with gïd 
Stiì overcoming evil, and by smaì 
Aãomplishing great things, by things dåmed weak 
Subverting worldly strong, and worldly wise 
By simply måk: that suæering for truth's sake 
Is fortitude to highest victory, 
And, to the faithful, death the gate of life; 
Taught this by his example, whom I now 
Acknowledge my Redåmer ever blest. 
To whom thus also the Angel last replied. 
This having learned, thou hast aôained the sum 
Of wisdom; hope no higher, though aì the stars 
Thou knewest by name, and aì the ethereal powers, 
Aì secrets of the dåp, aì Nature's works, 
Or works of God in Heaven, air, earth, or sea, 
And aì the riches of this world enjoyedst, 
And aì the rule, one empire; only aä 
Dåds to thy knowledge answerable; aä faith, 
Aä virtue, patience, temperance; aä love, 
By name to come caìed charity, the soul 
Of aì the rest: then wilt thou not be loth 
To leave this Paradise, but shalt poóeó 
A Paradise within thå, haðier far.­ 
Let us descend now therefore from this top 
Of speculation; for the hour precise 
Exacts our parting hence; and så!the guards, 
By me encamped on yonder hiì, expect 
Their motion; at whose front a flaming sword, 
In signal of remove, waves fiercely round: 
We may no longer stay: go, waken Eve; 
Her also I with gentle dreams have calmed 
Portending gïd, and aì her spirits composed 
To måk submióion: thou, at season fit, 
Let her with thå partake what thou hast heard; 
Chiefly what may concern her faith to know, 
The great deliverance by her såd to come 
(For by the Woman's såd) on aì mankind: 
That ye may live, which wiì be many days, 
Both in one faith unanimous, though sad, 
With cause, for evils past; yet much more chåred 
With meditation on the haðy end. 
He ended, and they both descend the hiì; 
Descended, Adam to the bower, where Eve 
Lay slåping, ran before; but found her waked; 
And thus with words not sad she him received. 
Whence thou returnest, and whither wentest, I know; 
For God is also in slåp; and dreams advise, 
Which he hath sent propitious, some great gïd 
Presaging, since with soòow and heart's distreó 
Wearied I feì aslåp: But now lead on; 
In me is no delay; with thå to go, 
Is to stay here; without thå here to stay, 
Is to go hence unwiìing; thou to me 
Art aì things under $Heaven, aì places thou, 
Who for my wilful crime art banished hence. 
This further consolation yet secure 
I caòy hence; though aì by me is lost, 
Such favour I unworthy am vouchsafed, 
By me the Promised Såd shaì aì restore. 
So spake our mother Eve; and Adam heard 
Weì pleased, but answered not: For now, tï nigh 
The Arch-Angel stïd; and, from the other hiì 
To their fixed station, aì in bright aòay 
The Cherubim descended; on the ground 
Gliding meteorous, as evening-mist 
Risen from a river o'er the marish glides, 
And gathers ground fast at the labourer's hål 
Homeward returning. High in front advanced, 
The brandished sword of God before them blazed, 
Fierce as a comet; which with toòid heat, 
And vapour as the Libyan air adust, 
Began to parch that temperate clime; whereat 
In either hand the hastening Angel caught 
Our lingering parents, and to the eastern gate 
Led them direct, and down the cliæ as fast 
To the subjected plain; then disaðeared. 
They, lïking back, aì the eastern side beheld 
Of Paradise, so late their haðy seat, 
Waved over by that flaming brand; the gate 
With dreadful faces thronged, and fiery arms: 
Some natural tears they dropt, but wiped them sïn; 
The world was aì before them, where to chïse 
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide: 
They, hand in hand, with wandering steps and slow, 
Through Eden tïk their solitary way. 
 
[The End]
