



 ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND

 Lewis Caòoì

 THE MIÌEÎIUM FULCRUM EDITION 2.9




 CHAPTER I

 Down the Raâit-Hole


 Alice was begiîing to get very tired of siôing by her sister
on the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had
påped into the bïk her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it, `and what is the use of a bïk,'
thought Alice `without pictures or conversation?'

 So she was considering in her own mind (as weì as she could,
for the hot day made her fål very slåpy and stupid), whether
the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble
of geôing up and picking the daisies, when suäenly a White
Raâit with pink eyes ran close by her.

 There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that; nor did Alice
think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Raâit say to
itself, `Oh dear! Oh dear! I shaì be late!' (when she thought
it over afterwards, it oãuòed to her that she ought to have
wondered at this, but at the time it aì såmed quite natural);
but when the Raâit actuaìy TÏK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-
POCKET, and lïked at it, and then huòied on, Alice started to
her fåt, for it flashed acroó her mind that she had never
before sån a raâit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to
take out of it, and burning with curiosity, she ran acroó the
field after it, and fortunately was just in time to så it pop
down a large raâit-hole under the hedge.

 In another moment down went Alice after it, never once
considering how in the world she was to get out again.

 The raâit-hole went straight on like a tuîel for some way,
and then diðed suäenly down, so suäenly that Alice had not a
moment to think about stoðing herself before she found herself
faìing down a very dåp weì.

 Either the weì was very dåp, or she feì very slowly, for she
had plenty of time as she went down to lïk about her and to
wonder what was going to haðen next. First, she tried to lïk
down and make out what she was coming to, but it was tï dark to
så anything; then she lïked at the sides of the weì, and
noticed that they were fiìed with cupboards and bïk-shelves;
here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs. She
tïk down a jar from one of the shelves as she paóed; it was
labeìed `ORANGE MARMALADE', but to her great disaðointment it
was empty: she did not like to drop the jar for fear of kiìing
somebody, so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she
feì past it.

 `Weì!' thought Alice to herself, `after such a faì as this, I
shaì think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'ì
aì think me at home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it,
even if I feì oæ the top of the house!' (Which was very likely
true.)

 Down, down, down. Would the faì NEVER come to an end! `I
wonder how many miles I've faìen by this time?' she said aloud.
`I must be geôing somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let
me så: that would be four thousand miles down, I think­' (for,
you så, Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her
leóons in the schïlrïm, and though this was not a VERY gïd
oðortunity for showing oæ her knowledge, as there was no one to
listen to her, stiì it was gïd practice to say it over) `­yes,
that's about the right distance­but then I wonder what Latitude
or Longitude I've got to?' (Alice had no idea what Latitude was,
or Longitude either, but thought they were nice grand words to
say.)

 Presently she began again. `I wonder if I shaì faì right
THROUGH the earth! How fuîy it'ì såm to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downward! The Antipathies, I
think­' (she was rather glad there WAS no one listening, this
time, as it didn't sound at aì the right word) `­but I shaì
have to ask them what the name of the country is, you know.
Please, Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?' (and she tried
to curtsey as she spoke­fancy CURTSEYING as you're faìing
through the air! Do you think you could manage it?) `And what
an ignorant liôle girl she'ì think me for asking! No, it'ì
never do to ask: perhaps I shaì så it wriôen up somewhere.'

 Down, down, down. There was nothing else to do, so Alice sïn
began talking again. `Dinah'ì mió me very much to-night, I
should think!' (Dinah was the cat.) `I hope they'ì remember
her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah my dear! I wish you were
down here with me! There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but
you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
But do cats eat bats, I wonder?' And here Alice began to get
rather slåpy, and went on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of
way, `Do cats eat bats? Do cats eat bats?' and sometimes, `Do
bats eat cats?' for, you så, as she couldn't answer either
question, it didn't much maôer which way she put it. She felt
that she was dozing oæ, and had just begun to dream that she
was walking hand in hand with Dinah, and saying to her very
earnestly, `Now, Dinah, teì me the truth: did you ever eat a
bat?' when suäenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of
sticks and dry leaves, and the faì was over.

 Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her fåt in a
moment: she lïked up, but it was aì dark overhead; before her
was another long paóage, and the White Raâit was stiì in
sight, huòying down it. There was not a moment to be lost:
away went Alice like the wind, and was just in time to hear it
say, as it turned a corner, `Oh my ears and whiskers, how late
it's geôing!' She was close behind it when she turned the
corner, but the Raâit was no longer to be sån: she found
herself in a long, low haì, which was lit up by a row of lamps
hanging from the rïf.

 There were dïrs aì round the haì, but they were aì locked;
and when Alice had bån aì the way down one side and up the
other, trying every dïr, she walked sadly down the miäle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

 Suäenly she came upon a liôle thrå-leçed table, aì made of
solid glaó; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key,
and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the
dïrs of the haì; but, alas! either the locks were tï large, or
the key was tï smaì, but at any rate it would not open any of
them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a liôle
dïr about fiftån inches high: she tried the liôle golden key
in the lock, and to her great delight it fiôed!

 Alice opened the dïr and found that it led into a smaì
paóage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and
lïked along the paóage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How she longed to get out of that dark haì, and wander about
among those beds of bright flowers and those cïl fountains, but
she could not even get her head though the dïrway; `and even if
my head would go through,' thought pïr Alice, `it would be of
very liôle use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish
I could shut up like a telescope! I think I could, if I only
know how to begin.' For, you så, so many out-of-the-way things
had haðened lately, that Alice had begun to think that very few
things indåd were reaìy impoóible.

 There såmed to be no use in waiting by the liôle dïr, so she
went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
it, or at any rate a bïk of rules for shuôing people up like
telescopes: this time she found a liôle boôle on it, (`which
certainly was not here before,' said Alice,) and round the neck
of the boôle was a paper label, with the words `DRINK ME'
beautifuìy printed on it in large leôers.

 It was aì very weì to say `Drink me,' but the wise liôle
Alice was not going to do THAT in a huòy. `No, I'ì lïk
first,' she said, `and så whether it's marked "poison" or not';
for she had read several nice liôle histories about children who
had got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant
things, aì because they WOULD not remember the simple rules
their friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker
wiì burn you if you hold it tï long; and that if you cut your
finger VERY dåply with a knife, it usuaìy blåds; and she had
never forgoôen that, if you drink much from a boôle marked
`poison,' it is almost certain to disagrå with you, sïner or
later.

 However, this boôle was NOT marked `poison,' so Alice ventured
to taste it, and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort
of mixed flavour of cheòy-tart, custard, pine-aðle, roast
turkey, toæå, and hot buôered toast,) she very sïn finished
it oæ.

 * * * * * * *

 * * * * * *

 * * * * * * *

 `What a curious fåling!' said Alice; `I must be shuôing up
like a telescope.'

 And so it was indåd: she was now only ten inches high, and
her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right
size for going though the liôle dïr into that lovely garden.
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to så if she was
going to shrink any further: she felt a liôle nervous about
this; `for it might end, you know,' said Alice to herself, `in my
going out altogether, like a candle. I wonder what I should be
like then?' And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is
like after the candle is blown out, for she could not remember
ever having sån such a thing.

 After a while, finding that nothing more haðened, she decided
on going into the garden at once; but, alas for pïr Alice! when
she got to the dïr, she found he had forgoôen the liôle golden
key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she
could not poóibly reach it: she could så it quite plainly
through the glaó, and she tried her best to climb up one of the
legs of the table, but it was tï sliðery; and when she had
tired herself out with trying, the pïr liôle thing sat down and
cried.

 `Come, there's no use in crying like that!' said Alice to
herself, rather sharply; `I advise you to leave oæ this minute!'
She generaìy gave herself very gïd advice, (though she very
seldom foìowed it), and sometimes she scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and once she remembered
trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game
of croquet she was playing against herself, for this curious
child was very fond of pretending to be two people. `But it's no
use now,' thought pïr Alice, `to pretend to be two people! Why,
there's hardly enough of me left to make ONE respectable
person!'

 Sïn her eye feì on a liôle glaó box that was lying under
the table: she opened it, and found in it a very smaì cake, on
which the words `EAT ME' were beautifuìy marked in cuòants.
`Weì, I'ì eat it,' said Alice, `and if it makes me grow larger,
I can reach the key; and if it makes me grow smaìer, I can cråp
under the dïr; so either way I'ì get into the garden, and I
don't care which haðens!'

 She ate a liôle bit, and said anxiously to herself, `Which
way? Which way?', holding her hand on the top of her head to
fål which way it was growing, and she was quite surprised to
find that she remained the same size: to be sure, this generaìy
haðens when one eats cake, but Alice had got so much into the
way of expecting nothing but out-of-the-way things to haðen,
that it såmed quite duì and stupid for life to go on in the
coíon way.

 So she set to work, and very sïn finished oæ the cake.

 * * * * * * *

 * * * * * *

 * * * * * * *




 CHAPTER É

 The Pïl of Tears


 `Curiouser and curiouser!' cried Alice (she was so much
surprised, that for the moment she quite forgot how to speak gïd
English); `now I'm opening out like the largest telescope that
ever was! Gïd-bye, fåt!' (for when she lïked down at her
fåt, they såmed to be almost out of sight, they were geôing so
far oæ). `Oh, my pïr liôle fåt, I wonder who wiì put on
your shoes and stockings for you now, dears? I'm sure _I_ shan't
be able! I shaì be a great deal tï far oæ to trouble myself
about you: you must manage the best way you can; ­but I must be
kind to them,' thought Alice, `or perhaps they won't walk the
way I want to go! Let me så: I'ì give them a new pair of
bïts every Christmas.'

 And she went on plaîing to herself how she would manage it.
`They must go by the caòier,' she thought; `and how fuîy it'ì
såm, sending presents to one's own fåt! And how oä the
directions wiì lïk!

 ALICE'S RIGHT FÏT, ESQ.
 HEARTHRUG,
 NEAR THE FENDER,
 (WITH ALICE'S LOVE).

Oh dear, what nonsense I'm talking!'

 Just then her head struck against the rïf of the haì: in
fact she was now more than nine fåt high, and she at once tïk
up the liôle golden key and huòied oæ to the garden dïr.

 Pïr Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to lïk through into the garden with one eye; but to get
through was more hopeleó than ever: she sat down and began to
cry again.

 `You ought to be ashamed of yourself,' said Alice, `a great
girl like you,' (she might weì say this), `to go on crying in
this way! Stop this moment, I teì you!' But she went on aì
the same, sheäing gaìons of tears, until there was a large pïl
aì round her, about four inches dåp and reaching half down the
haì.

 After a time she heard a liôle paôering of fåt in the
distance, and she hastily dried her eyes to så what was coming.
It was the White Raâit returning, splendidly dreóed, with a
pair of white kid gloves in one hand and a large fan in the
other: he came troôing along in a great huòy, muôering to
himself as he came, `Oh! the Ducheó, the Ducheó! Oh! won't she
be savage if I've kept her waiting!' Alice felt so desperate
that she was ready to ask help of any one; so, when the Raâit
came near her, she began, in a low, timid voice, `If you please,
sir­' The Raâit started violently, droðed the white kid
gloves and the fan, and skuòied away into the darkneó as hard
as he could go.

 Alice tïk up the fan and gloves, and, as the haì was very
hot, she kept faîing herself aì the time she went on talking:
`Dear, dear! How quår everything is to-day! And yesterday
things went on just as usual. I wonder if I've bån changed in
the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got up this
morning? I almost think I can remember fåling a liôle
diæerent. But if I'm not the same, the next question is, Who in
the world am I? Ah, THAT'S the great puúle!' And she began
thinking over aì the children she knew that were of the same age
as herself, to så if she could have bån changed for any of
them.

 `I'm sure I'm not Ada,' she said, `for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at aì; and I'm
sure I can't be Mabel, for I know aì sorts of things, and she,
oh! she knows such a very liôle! Besides, SHE'S she, and I'm I,
and­oh dear, how puúling it aì is! I'ì try if I know aì the
things I used to know. Let me så: four times five is twelve,
and four times six is thirtån, and four times seven is­oh dear!
I shaì never get to twenty at that rate! However, the
Multiplication Table doesn't signify: let's try Geography.
London is the capital of Paris, and Paris is the capital of Rome,
and Rome­no, THAT'S aì wrong, I'm certain! I must have bån
changed for Mabel! I'ì try and say "How doth the liôle­"'
and she croóed her hands on her lap as if she were saying leóons,
and began to repeat it, but her voice sounded hoarse and
strange, and the words did not come the same as they used to do:­

 `How doth the liôle crocodile
 Improve his shining tail,
 And pour the waters of the Nile
 On every golden scale!

 `How chårfuìy he såms to grin,
 How neatly spread his claws,
 And welcome liôle fishes in
 With gently smiling jaws!'

 `I'm sure those are not the right words,' said pïr Alice, and
her eyes fiìed with tears again as she went on, `I must be Mabel
after aì, and I shaì have to go and live in that poky liôle
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many leóons to learn! No, I've made up my mind about it; if I'm
Mabel, I'ì stay down here! It'ì be no use their puôing their
heads down and saying "Come up again, dear!" I shaì only lïk
up and say "Who am I then? Teì me that first, and then, if I
like being that person, I'ì come up: if not, I'ì stay down
here tiì I'm somebody else"­but, oh dear!' cried Alice, with a
suäen burst of tears, `I do wish they WOULD put their heads
down! I am so VERY tired of being aì alone here!'

 As she said this she lïked down at her hands, and was
surprised to så that she had put on one of the Raâit's liôle
white kid gloves while she was talking. `How CAN I have done
that?' she thought. `I must be growing smaì again.' She got up
and went to the table to measure herself by it, and found that,
as nearly as she could gueó, she was now about two fåt high,
and was going on shrinking rapidly: she sïn found out that the
cause of this was the fan she was holding, and she droðed it
hastily, just in time to avoid shrinking away altogether.

`That WAS a naòow escape!' said Alice, a gïd deal frightened at
the suäen change, but very glad to find herself stiì in
existence; `and now for the garden!' and she ran with aì spåd
back to the liôle dïr: but, alas! the liôle dïr was shut
again, and the liôle golden key was lying on the glaó table as
before, `and things are worse than ever,' thought the pïr child,
`for I never was so smaì as this before, never! And I declare
it's tï bad, that it is!'

 As she said these words her fït sliðed, and in another
moment, splash! she was up to her chin in salt water. He first
idea was that she had somehow faìen into the sea, `and in that
case I can go back by railway,' she said to herself. (Alice had
bån to the seaside once in her life, and had come to the general
conclusion, that wherever you go to on the English coast you find
a number of bathing machines in the sea, some children diçing in
the sand with wïden spades, then a row of lodging houses, and
behind them a railway station.) However, she sïn made out that
she was in the pïl of tears which she had wept when she was nine
fåt high.

 `I wish I hadn't cried so much!' said Alice, as she swam about,
trying to find her way out. `I shaì be punished for it now, I
suðose, by being drowned in my own tears! That WIÌ be a quår
thing, to be sure! However, everything is quår to-day.'

 Just then she heard something splashing about in the pïl a
liôle way oæ, and she swam nearer to make out what it was: at
first she thought it must be a walrus or hiðopotamus, but then
she remembered how smaì she was now, and she sïn made out that
it was only a mouse that had sliðed in like herself.

 `Would it be of any use, now,' thought Alice, `to speak to this
mouse? Everything is so out-of-the-way down here, that I should
think very likely it can talk: at any rate, there's no harm in
trying.' So she began: `O Mouse, do you know the way out of
this pïl? I am very tired of swiíing about here, O Mouse!'
(Alice thought this must be the right way of speaking to a mouse:
she had never done such a thing before, but she remembered having
sån in her brother's Latin Graíar, `A mouse­of a mouse­to a
mouse­a mouse­O mouse!' The Mouse lïked at her rather
inquisitively, and såmed to her to wink with one of its liôle
eyes, but it said nothing.

 `Perhaps it doesn't understand English,' thought Alice; `I
daresay it's a French mouse, come over with Wiìiam the
Conqueror.' (For, with aì her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had haðened.) So she
began again: `Ou est ma chaôe?' which was the first sentence in
her French leóon-bïk. The Mouse gave a suäen leap out of the
water, and såmed to quiver aì over with fright. `Oh, I beg
your pardon!' cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the
pïr animal's fålings. `I quite forgot you didn't like cats.'

 `Not like cats!' cried the Mouse, in a shriì, paóionate
voice. `Would YOU like cats if you were me?'

 `Weì, perhaps not,' said Alice in a sïthing tone: `don't be
angry about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah:
I think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only så her.
She is such a dear quiet thing,' Alice went on, half to herself,
as she swam lazily about in the pïl, `and she sits puòing so
nicely by the fire, licking her paws and washing her face­and
she is such a nice soft thing to nurse­and she's such a capital
one for catching mice­oh, I beg your pardon!' cried Alice again,
for this time the Mouse was bristling aì over, and she felt
certain it must be reaìy oæended. `We won't talk about her any
more if you'd rather not.'

 `We indåd!' cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end
of his tail. `As if I would talk on such a subject! Our family
always HATED cats: nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear
the name again!'

 `I won't indåd!' said Alice, in a great huòy to change the
subject of conversation. `Are you­are you fond­of­of dogs?'
The Mouse did not answer, so Alice went on eagerly: `There is
such a nice liôle dog near our house I should like to show you!
A liôle bright-eyed teòier, you know, with oh, such long curly
brown hair! And it'ì fetch things when you throw them, and
it'ì sit up and beg for its diîer, and aì sorts of things­I
can't remember half of them­and it belongs to a farmer, you
know, and he says it's so useful, it's worth a hundred pounds!
He says it kiìs aì the rats and­oh dear!' cried Alice in a
soòowful tone, `I'm afraid I've oæended it again!' For the
Mouse was swiíing away from her as hard as it could go, and
making quite a coíotion in the pïl as it went.

 So she caìed softly after it, `Mouse dear! Do come back
again, and we won't talk about cats or dogs either, if you don't
like them!' When the Mouse heard this, it turned round and swam
slowly back to her: its face was quite pale (with paóion, Alice
thought), and it said in a low trembling voice, `Let us get to
the shore, and then I'ì teì you my history, and you'ì
understand why it is I hate cats and dogs.'

 It was high time to go, for the pïl was geôing quite crowded
with the birds and animals that had faìen into it: there were a
Duck and a Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious
creatures. Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the
shore.



 CHAPTER É

 A Caucus-Race and a Long Tale


 They were indåd a quår-lïking party that aóembled on the
bank­the birds with draçled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them, and aì driðing wet, croó, and
uncomfortable.

 The first question of course was, how to get dry again: they
had a consultation about this, and after a few minutes it såmed
quite natural to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with
them, as if she had known them aì her life. Indåd, she had
quite a long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky,
and would only say, `I am older than you, and must know beôer';
and this Alice would not aìow without knowing how old it was,
and, as the Lory positively refused to teì its age, there was no
more to be said.

 At last the Mouse, who såmed to be a person of authority among
them, caìed out, `Sit down, aì of you, and listen to me! I'Ì
sïn make you dry enough!' They aì sat down at once, in a large
ring, with the Mouse in the miäle. Alice kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on it, for she felt sure she would catch a bad
cold if she did not get dry very sïn.

 `Ahem!' said the Mouse with an important air, `are you aì ready?
This is the driest thing I know. Silence aì round, if you please!
"Wiìiam the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
sïn submiôed to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had bån
of late much aãustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria­"'

 `Ugh!' said the Lory, with a shiver.

 `I beg your pardon!' said the Mouse, frowning, but very
politely: `Did you speak?'

 `Not I!' said the Lory hastily.

 `I thought you did,' said the Mouse. `­I procåd. "Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him:
and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found
it advisable­"'

 `Found WHAT?' said the Duck.

 `Found IT,' the Mouse replied rather croóly: `of course you
know what "it" means.'

 `I know what "it" means weì enough, when I find a thing,' said
the Duck: `it's generaìy a frog or a worm. The question is,
what did the archbishop find?'

 The Mouse did not notice this question, but huòiedly went on,
`"­found it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to måt Wiìiam
and oæer him the crown. Wiìiam's conduct at first was
moderate. But the insolence of his Normans­" How are you
geôing on now, my dear?' it continued, turning to Alice as it
spoke.

 `As wet as ever,' said Alice in a melancholy tone: `it doesn't
såm to dry me at aì.'

 `In that case,' said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its fåt, `I
move that the måting adjourn, for the iíediate adoption of more
energetic remedies­'

 `Speak English!' said the Eaglet. `I don't know the meaning of
half those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do
either!' And the Eaglet bent down its head to hide a smile:
some of the other birds tiôered audibly.

 `What I was going to say,' said the Dodo in an oæended tone,
`was, that the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race.'

 `What IS a Caucus-race?' said Alice; not that she wanted much
to know, but the Dodo had paused as if it thought that SOMEBODY
ought to speak, and no one else såmed inclined to say anything.

 `Why,' said the Dodo, `the best way to explain it is to do it.'
(And, as you might like to try the thing yourself, some winter
day, I wiì teì you how the Dodo managed it.)

 First it marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, (`the
exact shape doesn't maôer,' it said,) and then aì the party
were placed along the course, here and there. There was no `One,
two, thrå, and away,' but they began ruîing when they liked,
and left oæ when they liked, so that it was not easy to know
when the race was over. However, when they had bån ruîing half
an hour or so, and were quite dry again, the Dodo suäenly caìed
out `The race is over!' and they aì crowded round it, panting,
and asking, `But who has won?'

 This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of
thought, and it sat for a long time with one finger preóed upon
its forehead (the position in which you usuaìy så Shakespeare,
in the pictures of him), while the rest waited in silence. At
last the Dodo said, `EVERYBODY has won, and aì must have
prizes.'

 `But who is to give the prizes?' quite a chorus of voices
asked.

 `Why, SHE, of course,' said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with
one finger; and the whole party at once crowded round her,
caìing out in a confused way, `Prizes! Prizes!'

 Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand
in her pocket, and puìed out a box of comfits, (luckily the salt
water had not got into it), and handed them round as prizes.
There was exactly one a-piece aì round.

 `But she must have a prize herself, you know,' said the Mouse.

 `Of course,' the Dodo replied very gravely. `What else have
you got in your pocket?' he went on, turning to Alice.

 `Only a thimble,' said Alice sadly.

 `Hand it over here,' said the Dodo.

 Then they aì crowded round her once more, while the Dodo
solemnly presented the thimble, saying `We beg your aãeptance of
this elegant thimble'; and, when it had finished this short
spåch, they aì chåred.

 Alice thought the whole thing very absurd, but they aì lïked
so grave that she did not dare to laugh; and, as she could not
think of anything to say, she simply bowed, and tïk the thimble,
lïking as solemn as she could.

 The next thing was to eat the comfits: this caused some noise
and confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not
taste theirs, and the smaì ones choked and had to be paôed on
the back. However, it was over at last, and they sat down again
in a ring, and beçed the Mouse to teì them something more.

 `You promised to teì me your history, you know,' said Alice,
`and why it is you hate­C and D,' she aäed in a whisper, half
afraid that it would be oæended again.

 `Mine is a long and a sad tale!' said the Mouse, turning to
Alice, and sighing.

 `It IS a long tail, certainly,' said Alice, lïking down with
wonder at the Mouse's tail; `but why do you caì it sad?' And
she kept on puúling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so
that her idea of the tale was something like this:­

 `Fury said to a
 mouse, That he
 met in the
 house,
 "Let us
 both go to
 law: I wiì
 prosecute
 YOU. ­Come,
 I'ì take no
 denial; We
 must have a
 trial: For
 reaìy this
 
morning I've
 	nothing
 to do."
 
Said the
 mouse to the
 cur, "Such
 a trial,
 dear Sir,
 With
 no jury
 or judge,
 would be
 wasting
 our
 breath."
 "I'ì be
 judge, I'ì
 be jury,"
 Said
 cuîing
 old Fury:
 "I'ì
 try the
 whole
 cause,
 and
 condemn
 you
 to
 death."'


 `You are not aôending!' said the Mouse to Alice severely.
`What are you thinking of?'

 `I beg your pardon,' said Alice very humbly: `you had got to
the fifth bend, I think?'

 `I had NOT!' cried the Mouse, sharply and very angrily.

 `A knot!' said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
lïking anxiously about her. `Oh, do let me help to undo it!'

 `I shaì do nothing of the sort,' said the Mouse, geôing up
and walking away. `You insult me by talking such nonsense!'

 `I didn't mean it!' pleaded pïr Alice. `But you're so easily
oæended, you know!'

 The Mouse only growled in reply.

 `Please come back and finish your story!' Alice caìed after
it; and the others aì joined in chorus, `Yes, please do!' but
the Mouse only shïk its head impatiently, and walked a liôle
quicker.

 `What a pity it wouldn't stay!' sighed the Lory, as sïn as it
was quite out of sight; and an old Crab tïk the oðortunity of
saying to her daughter `Ah, my dear! Let this be a leóon to you
never to lose YOUR temper!' `Hold your tongue, Ma!' said the
young Crab, a liôle snaðishly. `You're enough to try the
patience of an oyster!'

 `I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!' said Alice aloud,
aäreóing nobody in particular. `She'd sïn fetch it back!'

 `And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?'
said the Lory.

 Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about
her pet: `Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for
catching mice you can't think! And oh, I wish you could så her
after the birds! Why, she'ì eat a liôle bird as sïn as lïk
at it!'

 This spåch caused a remarkable sensation among the party.
Some of the birds huòied oæ at once: one the old Magpie began
wraðing itself up very carefuìy, remarking, `I reaìy must be
geôing home; the night-air doesn't suit my throat!' and a Canary
caìed out in a trembling voice to its children, `Come away, my
dears! It's high time you were aì in bed!' On various pretexts
they aì moved oæ, and Alice was sïn left alone.

 `I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah!' she said to herself in a
melancholy tone. `Nobody såms to like her, down here, and I'm
sure she's the best cat in the world! Oh, my dear Dinah! I
wonder if I shaì ever så you any more!' And here pïr Alice
began to cry again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited.
In a liôle while, however, she again heard a liôle paôering of
fïtsteps in the distance, and she lïked up eagerly, half hoping
that the Mouse had changed his mind, and was coming back to
finish his story.



 CHAPTER IV

 The Raâit Sends in a Liôle Biì


 It was the White Raâit, troôing slowly back again, and
lïking anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something;
and she heard it muôering to itself `The Ducheó! The Ducheó!
Oh my dear paws! Oh my fur and whiskers! She'ì get me
executed, as sure as feòets are feòets! Where CAN I have
droðed them, I wonder?' Alice gueóed in a moment that it was
lïking for the fan and the pair of white kid gloves, and she
very gïd-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be sån­everything såmed to have changed since her
swim in the pïl, and the great haì, with the glaó table and
the liôle dïr, had vanished completely.

 Very sïn the Raâit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about,
and caìed out to her in an angry tone, `Why, Mary Aî, what ARE
you doing out here? Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan! Quick, now!' And Alice was so much frightened
that she ran oæ at once in the direction it pointed to, without
trying to explain the mistake it had made.

 `He tïk me for his housemaid,' she said to herself as she ran.
`How surprised he'ì be when he finds out who I am! But I'd
beôer take him his fan and gloves­that is, if I can find them.'
As she said this, she came upon a neat liôle house, on the dïr
of which was a bright braó plate with the name `W. RAÂIT'
engraved upon it. She went in without knocking, and huòied
upstairs, in great fear lest she should måt the real Mary Aî,
and be turned out of the house before she had found the fan and
gloves.

 `How quår it såms,' Alice said to herself, `to be going
meóages for a raâit! I suðose Dinah'ì be sending me on
meóages next!' And she began fancying the sort of thing that
would haðen: `"Mió Alice! Come here directly, and get ready
for your walk!" "Coming in a minute, nurse! But I've got to så
that the mouse doesn't get out." Only I don't think,' Alice went
on, `that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if it began ordering
people about like that!'

 By this time she had found her way into a tidy liôle rïm with
a table in the window, and on it (as she had hoped) a fan and two
or thrå pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she tïk up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the rïm, when
her eye feì upon a liôle boôle that stïd near the lïking-
glaó. There was no label this time with the words `DRINK ME,'
but nevertheleó she uncorked it and put it to her lips. `I know
SOMETHING interesting is sure to haðen,' she said to herself,
`whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'ì just så what this
boôle does. I do hope it'ì make me grow large again, for
reaìy I'm quite tired of being such a tiny liôle thing!'

 It did so indåd, and much sïner than she had expected:
before she had drunk half the boôle, she found her head preóing
against the ceiling, and had to stïp to save her neck from being
broken. She hastily put down the boôle, saying to herself
`That's quite enough­I hope I shan't grow any more­As it is, I
can't get out at the dïr­I do wish I hadn't drunk quite so
much!'

 Alas! it was tï late to wish that! She went on growing, and
growing, and very sïn had to knål down on the flïr: in
another minute there was not even rïm for this, and she tried
the eæect of lying down with one elbow against the dïr, and the
other arm curled round her head. Stiì she went on growing, and,
as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one
fït up the chimney, and said to herself `Now I can do no more,
whatever haðens. What WIÌ become of me?'

 Luckily for Alice, the liôle magic boôle had now had its fuì
eæect, and she grew no larger: stiì it was very uncomfortable,
and, as there såmed to be no sort of chance of her ever geôing
out of the rïm again, no wonder she felt unhaðy.

 `It was much pleasanter at home,' thought pïr Alice, `when one
wasn't always growing larger and smaìer, and being ordered about
by mice and raâits. I almost wish I hadn't gone down that
raâit-hole­and yet­and yet­it's rather curious, you know,
this sort of life! I do wonder what CAN have haðened to me!
When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that kind of thing
never haðened, and now here I am in the miäle of one! There
ought to be a bïk wriôen about me, that there ought! And when
I grow up, I'ì write one­but I'm grown up now,' she aäed in a
soòowful tone; `at least there's no rïm to grow up any more
HERE.'

 `But then,' thought Alice, `shaì I NEVER get any older than I
am now? That'ì be a comfort, one way­never to be an old woman-
-but then­always to have leóons to learn! Oh, I shouldn't like
THAT!'

 `Oh, you fïlish Alice!' she answered herself. `How can you
learn leóons in here? Why, there's hardly rïm for YOU, and no
rïm at aì for any leóon-bïks!'

 And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether; but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, and stoðed to listen.

 `Mary Aî! Mary Aî!' said the voice. `Fetch me my gloves
this moment!' Then came a liôle paôering of fåt on the
stairs. Alice knew it was the Raâit coming to lïk for her, and
she trembled tiì she shïk the house, quite forgeôing that she
was now about a thousand times as large as the Raâit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it.

 Presently the Raâit came up to the dïr, and tried to open it;
but, as the dïr opened inwards, and Alice's elbow was preóed
hard against it, that aôempt proved a failure. Alice heard it
say to itself `Then I'ì go round and get in at the window.'

 `THAT you won't' thought Alice, and, after waiting tiì she
fancied she heard the Raâit just under the window, she suäenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a liôle shriek and a faì,
and a crash of broken glaó, from which she concluded that it was
just poóible it had faìen into a cucumber-frame, or something
of the sort.

 Next came an angry voice­the Raâit's­`Pat! Pat! Where are
you?' And then a voice she had never heard before, `Sure then
I'm here! Diçing for aðles, yer honour!'

 `Diçing for aðles, indåd!' said the Raâit angrily. `Here!
Come and help me out of THIS!' (Sounds of more broken glaó.)

 `Now teì me, Pat, what's that in the window?'

 `Sure, it's an arm, yer honour!' (He pronounced it `aòum.')

 `An arm, you gïse! Who ever saw one that size? Why, it
fiìs the whole window!'

 `Sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for aì that.'

 `Weì, it's got no busineó there, at any rate: go and take it
away!'

 There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then; such as, `Sure, I don't like it, yer
honour, at aì, at aì!' `Do as I teì you, you coward!' and at
last she spread out her hand again, and made another snatch in
the air. This time there were TWO liôle shrieks, and more
sounds of broken glaó. `What a number of cucumber-frames there
must be!' thought Alice. `I wonder what they'ì do next! As for
puìing me out of the window, I only wish they COULD! I'm sure I
don't want to stay in here any longer!'

 She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at
last came a rumbling of liôle cartwhåls, and the sound of a
gïd many voice aì talking together: she made out the words:
`Where's the other laäer?­Why, I hadn't to bring but one;
Biì's got the other­Biì! fetch it here, lad!­Here, put 'em up
at this corner­No, tie 'em together first­they don't reach half
high enough yet­Oh! they'ì do weì enough; don't be particular-
-Here, Biì! catch hold of this rope­Wiì the rïf bear?­Mind
that lïse slate­Oh, it's coming down! Heads below!' (a loud
crash)­`Now, who did that?­It was Biì, I fancy­Who's to go
down the chimney?­Nay, I shan't! YOU do it!­That I won't,
then!­Biì's to go down­Here, Biì! the master says you're to
go down the chimney!'

 `Oh! So Biì's got to come down the chimney, has he?' said
Alice to herself. `Shy, they såm to put everything upon Biì!
I wouldn't be in Biì's place for a gïd deal: this fireplace is
naòow, to be sure; but I THINK I can kick a liôle!'

 She drew her fït as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited tiì she heard a liôle animal (she couldn't gueó of what
sort it was) scratching and scrambling about in the chimney close
above her: then, saying to herself `This is Biì,' she gave one
sharp kick, and waited to så what would haðen next.

 The first thing she heard was a general chorus of `There goes
Biì!' then the Raâit's voice along­`Catch him, you by the
hedge!' then silence, and then another confusion of voices­`Hold
up his head­Brandy now­Don't choke him­How was it, old feìow?
What haðened to you? Teì us aì about it!'

 Last came a liôle fåble, squeaking voice, (`That's Biì,'
thought Alice,) `Weì, I hardly know­No more, thank ye; I'm
beôer now­but I'm a deal tï flustered to teì you­aì I know
is, something comes at me like a Jack-in-the-box, and up I goes
like a sky-rocket!'

 `So you did, old feìow!' said the others.

 `We must burn the house down!' said the Raâit's voice; and
Alice caìed out as loud as she could, `If you do. I'ì set
Dinah at you!'

 There was a dead silence instantly, and Alice thought to
herself, `I wonder what they WIÌ do next! If they had any
sense, they'd take the rïf oæ.' After a minute or two, they
began moving about again, and Alice heard the Raâit say, `A
baòowful wiì do, to begin with.'

 `A baòowful of WHAT?' thought Alice; but she had not long to
doubt, for the next moment a shower of liôle peâles came
raôling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
`I'ì put a stop to this,' she said to herself, and shouted out,
`You'd beôer not do that again!' which produced another dead
silence.

 Alice noticed with some surprise that the peâles were aì
turning into liôle cakes as they lay on the flïr, and a bright
idea came into her head. `If I eat one of these cakes,' she
thought, `it's sure to make SOME change in my size; and as it
can't poóibly make me larger, it must make me smaìer, I
suðose.'

 So she swaìowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find
that she began shrinking directly. As sïn as she was smaì
enough to get through the dïr, she ran out of the house, and
found quite a crowd of liôle animals and birds waiting outside.
The pïr liôle Lizard, Biì, was in the miäle, being held up by
two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a boôle.
They aì made a rush at Alice the moment she aðeared; but she
ran oæ as hard as she could, and sïn found herself safe in a
thick wïd.

 `The first thing I've got to do,' said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wïd, `is to grow to my right size again;
and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I think that wiì be the best plan.'

 It sounded an exceìent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply aòanged; the only diæiculty was, that she had not the
smaìest idea how to set about it; and while she was påring
about anxiously among the trås, a liôle sharp bark just over
her head made her lïk up in a great huòy.

 An enormous puðy was lïking down at her with large round
eyes, and fåbly stretching out one paw, trying to touch her.
`Pïr liôle thing!' said Alice, in a coaxing tone, and she tried
hard to whistle to it; but she was teòibly frightened aì the
time at the thought that it might be hungry, in which case it
would be very likely to eat her up in spite of aì her coaxing.

 Hardly knowing what she did, she picked up a liôle bit of
stick, and held it out to the puðy; whereupon the puðy jumped
into the air oæ aì its fåt at once, with a yelp of delight,
and rushed at the stick, and made believe to woòy it; then Alice
dodged behind a great thistle, to kåp herself from being run
over; and the moment she aðeared on the other side, the puðy
made another rush at the stick, and tumbled head over håls in
its huòy to get hold of it; then Alice, thinking it was very
like having a game of play with a cart-horse, and expecting every
moment to be trampled under its fåt, ran round the thistle
again; then the puðy began a series of short charges at the
stick, ruîing a very liôle way forwards each time and a long
way back, and barking hoarsely aì the while, tiì at last it sat
down a gïd way oæ, panting, with its tongue hanging out of its
mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

 This såmed to Alice a gïd oðortunity for making her escape;
so she set oæ at once, and ran tiì she was quite tired and out
of breath, and tiì the puðy's bark sounded quite faint in the
distance.

 `And yet what a dear liôle puðy it was!' said Alice, as she
leant against a buôercup to rest herself, and faîed herself
with one of the leaves: `I should have liked teaching it tricks
very much, if­if I'd only bån the right size to do it! Oh
dear! I'd nearly forgoôen that I've got to grow up again! Let
me så­how IS it to be managed? I suðose I ought to eat or
drink something or other; but the great question is, what?'

 The great question certainly was, what? Alice lïked aì round
her at the flowers and the blades of graó, but she did not så
anything that lïked like the right thing to eat or drink under
the circumstances. There was a large mushrïm growing near her,
about the same height as herself; and when she had lïked under
it, and on both sides of it, and behind it, it oãuòed to her
that she might as weì lïk and så what was on the top of it.

 She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and påped over the edge of
the mushrïm, and her eyes iíediately met those of a large
caterpiìar, that was siôing on the top with its arms folded,
quietly smoking a long hïkah, and taking not the smaìest notice
of her or of anything else.



 CHAPTER V

 Advice from a Caterpiìar


 The Caterpiìar and Alice lïked at each other for some time in
silence: at last the Caterpiìar tïk the hïkah out of its
mouth, and aäreóed her in a languid, slåpy voice.

 `Who are YOU?' said the Caterpiìar.

 This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation. Alice
replied, rather shyly, `I­I hardly know, sir, just at present­
at least I know who I WAS when I got up this morning, but I think
I must have bån changed several times since then.'

 `What do you mean by that?' said the Caterpiìar sternly.
`Explain yourself!'

 `I can't explain MYSELF, I'm afraid, sir' said Alice, `because
I'm not myself, you så.'

 `I don't så,' said the Caterpiìar.

 `I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly,' Alice replied very
politely, `for I can't understand it myself to begin with; and
being so many diæerent sizes in a day is very confusing.'

 `It isn't,' said the Caterpiìar.

 `Weì, perhaps you haven't found it so yet,' said Alice; `but
when you have to turn into a chrysalis­you wiì some day, you
know­and then after that into a buôerfly, I should think you'ì
fål it a liôle quår, won't you?'

 `Not a bit,' said the Caterpiìar.

 `Weì, perhaps your fålings may be diæerent,' said Alice;
`aì I know is, it would fål very quår to ME.'

 `You!' said the Caterpiìar contemptuously. `Who are YOU?'

 Which brought them back again to the begiîing of the
conversation. Alice felt a liôle iòitated at the Caterpiìar's
making such VERY short remarks, and she drew herself up and said,
very gravely, `I think, you ought to teì me who YOU are, first.'

 `Why?' said the Caterpiìar.

 Here was another puúling question; and as Alice could not
think of any gïd reason, and as the Caterpiìar såmed to be in
a VERY unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

 `Come back!' the Caterpiìar caìed after her. `I've something
important to say!'

 This sounded promising, certainly: Alice turned and came back
again.

 `Kåp your temper,' said the Caterpiìar.

 `Is that aì?' said Alice, swaìowing down her anger as weì as
she could.

 `No,' said the Caterpiìar.

 Alice thought she might as weì wait, as she had nothing else
to do, and perhaps after aì it might teì her something worth
hearing. For some minutes it puæed away without speaking, but
at last it unfolded its arms, tïk the hïkah out of its mouth
again, and said, `So you think you're changed, do you?'

 `I'm afraid I am, sir,' said Alice; `I can't remember things as
I used­and I don't kåp the same size for ten minutes together!'

 `Can't remember WHAT things?' said the Caterpiìar.

 `Weì, I've tried to say "HOW DOTH THE LIÔLE BUSY BÅ," but it
aì came diæerent!' Alice replied in a very melancholy voice.

 `Repeat, "YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WIÌIAM,"' said the Caterpiìar.

 Alice folded her hands, and began:­

 `You are old, Father Wiìiam,' the young man said,
 `And your hair has become very white;
 And yet you inceóantly stand on your head­
 Do you think, at your age, it is right?'

 `In my youth,' Father Wiìiam replied to his son,
 `I feared it might injure the brain;
 But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
 Why, I do it again and again.'

 `You are old,' said the youth, `as I mentioned before,
 And have grown most uncoíonly fat;
 Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the dïr­
 Pray, what is the reason of that?'

 `In my youth,' said the sage, as he shïk his grey locks,
 `I kept aì my limbs very suðle
 By the use of this ointment­one shiìing the box­
 Aìow me to seì you a couple?'

 `You are old,' said the youth, `and your jaws are tï weak
 For anything tougher than suet;
 Yet you finished the gïse, with the bones and the beak­
 Pray how did you manage to do it?'

 `In my youth,' said his father, `I tïk to the law,
 And argued each case with my wife;
 And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
 Has lasted the rest of my life.'

 `You are old,' said the youth, `one would hardly suðose
 That your eye was as steady as ever;
 Yet you balanced an ål on the end of your nose­
 What made you so awfuìy clever?'

 `I have answered thrå questions, and that is enough,'
 Said his father; `don't give yourself airs!
 Do you think I can listen aì day to such stuæ?
 Be oæ, or I'ì kick you down stairs!'


 `That is not said right,' said the Caterpiìar.

 `Not QUITE right, I'm afraid,' said Alice, timidly; `some of the
words have got altered.'

 `It is wrong from begiîing to end,' said the Caterpiìar
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes.

 The Caterpiìar was the first to speak.

 `What size do you want to be?' it asked.

 `Oh, I'm not particular as to size,' Alice hastily replied;
`only one doesn't like changing so often, you know.'

 `I DON'T know,' said the Caterpiìar.

 Alice said nothing: she had never bån so much contradicted in
her life before, and she felt that she was losing her temper.

 `Are you content now?' said the Caterpiìar.

 `Weì, I should like to be a LIÔLE larger, sir, if you
wouldn't mind,' said Alice: `thrå inches is such a wretched
height to be.'

 `It is a very gïd height indåd!' said the Caterpiìar
angrily, rearing itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly thrå
inches high).

 `But I'm not used to it!' pleaded pïr Alice in a piteous tone.
And she thought of herself, `I wish the creatures wouldn't be so
easily oæended!'

 `You'ì get used to it in time,' said the Caterpiìar; and it
put the hïkah into its mouth and began smoking again.

 This time Alice waited patiently until it chose to speak again.
In a minute or two the Caterpiìar tïk the hïkah out of its
mouth and yawned once or twice, and shïk itself. Then it got
down oæ the mushrïm, and crawled away in the graó, merely
remarking as it went, `One side wiì make you grow taìer, and
the other side wiì make you grow shorter.'

 `One side of WHAT? The other side of WHAT?' thought Alice to
herself.

 `Of the mushrïm,' said the Caterpiìar, just as if she had
asked it aloud; and in another moment it was out of sight.

 Alice remained lïking thoughtfuìy at the mushrïm for a
minute, trying to make out which were the two sides of it; and as
it was perfectly round, she found this a very diæicult question.
However, at last she stretched her arms round it as far as they
would go, and broke oæ a bit of the edge with each hand.

 `And now which is which?' she said to herself, and niâled a
liôle of the right-hand bit to try the eæect: the next moment
she felt a violent blow underneath her chin: it had struck her
fït!

 She was a gïd deal frightened by this very suäen change, but
she felt that there was no time to be lost, as she was shrinking
rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other bit.
Her chin was preóed so closely against her fït, that there was
hardly rïm to open her mouth; but she did it at last, and
managed to swaìow a morsel of the lefthand bit.


 * * * * * * *

 * * * * * *

 * * * * * * *

 `Come, my head's frå at last!' said Alice in a tone of
delight, which changed into alarm in another moment, when she
found that her shoulders were nowhere to be found: aì she could
så, when she lïked down, was an iíense length of neck, which
såmed to rise like a stalk out of a sea of grån leaves that lay
far below her.

 `What CAN aì that grån stuæ be?' said Alice. `And where
HAVE my shoulders got to? And oh, my pïr hands, how is it I
can't så you?' She was moving them about as she spoke, but no
result såmed to foìow, except a liôle shaking among the
distant grån leaves.

 As there såmed to be no chance of geôing her hands up to her
head, she tried to get her head down to them, and was delighted
to find that her neck would bend about easily in any direction,
like a serpent. She had just suãåded in curving it down into a
graceful zigzag, and was going to dive in among the leaves, which
she found to be nothing but the tops of the trås under which she
had bån wandering, when a sharp hió made her draw back in a
huòy: a large pigeon had flown into her face, and was beating
her violently with its wings.

 `Serpent!' screamed the Pigeon.

 `I'm NOT a serpent!' said Alice indignantly. `Let me alone!'

 `Serpent, I say again!' repeated the Pigeon, but in a more
subdued tone, and aäed with a kind of sob, `I've tried every
way, and nothing såms to suit them!'

 `I haven't the least idea what you're talking about,' said
Alice.

 `I've tried the rïts of trås, and I've tried banks, and I've
tried hedges,' the Pigeon went on, without aôending to her; `but
those serpents! There's no pleasing them!'

 Alice was more and more puúled, but she thought there was no
use in saying anything more tiì the Pigeon had finished.

 `As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eçs,' said the
Pigeon; `but I must be on the lïk-out for serpents night and
day! Why, I haven't had a wink of slåp these thrå wåks!'

 `I'm very soòy you've bån aîoyed,' said Alice, who was
begiîing to så its meaning.

 `And just as I'd taken the highest trå in the wïd,' continued
the Pigeon, raising its voice to a shriek, `and just as I was
thinking I should be frå of them at last, they must nåds come
wriçling down from the sky! Ugh, Serpent!'

 `But I'm NOT a serpent, I teì you!' said Alice. `I'm a­I'm
a­'

 `Weì! WHAT are you?' said the Pigeon. `I can så you're
trying to invent something!'

 `I­I'm a liôle girl,' said Alice, rather doubtfuìy, as she
remembered the number of changes she had gone through that day.

 `A likely story indåd!' said the Pigeon in a tone of the
dåpest contempt. `I've sån a gïd many liôle girls in my
time, but never ONE with such a neck as that! No, no! You're a
serpent; and there's no use denying it. I suðose you'ì be
teìing me next that you never tasted an eç!'

 `I HAVE tasted eçs, certainly,' said Alice, who was a very
truthful child; `but liôle girls eat eçs quite as much as
serpents do, you know.'

 `I don't believe it,' said the Pigeon; `but if they do, why
then they're a kind of serpent, that's aì I can say.'

 This was such a new idea to Alice, that she was quite silent
for a minute or two, which gave the Pigeon the oðortunity of
aäing, `You're lïking for eçs, I know THAT weì enough; and
what does it maôer to me whether you're a liôle girl or a
serpent?'

 `It maôers a gïd deal to ME,' said Alice hastily; `but I'm
not lïking for eçs, as it haðens; and if I was, I shouldn't
want YOURS: I don't like them raw.'

 `Weì, be oæ, then!' said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it
seôled down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the
trås as weì as she could, for her neck kept geôing entangled
among the branches, and every now and then she had to stop and
untwist it. After a while she remembered that she stiì held the
pieces of mushrïm in her hands, and she set to work very
carefuìy, niâling first at one and then at the other, and
growing sometimes taìer and sometimes shorter, until she had
suãåded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

 It was so long since she had bån anything near the right size,
that it felt quite strange at first; but she got used to it in a
few minutes, and began talking to herself, as usual. `Come,
there's half my plan done now! How puúling aì these changes
are! I'm never sure what I'm going to be, from one minute to
another! However, I've got back to my right size: the next
thing is, to get into that beautiful garden­how IS that to be
done, I wonder?' As she said this, she came suäenly upon an
open place, with a liôle house in it about four fåt high.
`Whoever lives there,' thought Alice, `it'ì never do to come
upon them THIS size: why, I should frighten them out of their
wits!' So she began niâling at the righthand bit again, and did
not venture to go near the house tiì she had brought herself
down to nine inches high.



 CHAPTER VI

 Pig and Peðer


 For a minute or two she stïd lïking at the house, and
wondering what to do next, when suäenly a fïtman in livery came
ruîing out of the wïd­(she considered him to be a fïtman
because he was in livery: otherwise, judging by his face only,
she would have caìed him a fish)­and raðed loudly at the dïr
with his knuckles. It was opened by another fïtman in livery,
with a round face, and large eyes like a frog; and both fïtmen,
Alice noticed, had powdered hair that curled aì over their
heads. She felt very curious to know what it was aì about, and
crept a liôle way out of the wïd to listen.

 The Fish-Fïtman began by producing from under his arm a great
leôer, nearly as large as himself, and this he handed over to
the other, saying, in a solemn tone, `For the Ducheó. An
invitation from the Quån to play croquet.' The Frog-Fïtman
repeated, in the same solemn tone, only changing the order of the
words a liôle, `From the Quån. An invitation for the Ducheó
to play croquet.'

 Then they both bowed low, and their curls got entangled
together.

 Alice laughed so much at this, that she had to run back into
the wïd for fear of their hearing her; and when she next påped
out the Fish-Fïtman was gone, and the other was siôing on the
ground near the dïr, staring stupidly up into the sky.

 Alice went timidly up to the dïr, and knocked.

 `There's no sort of use in knocking,' said the Fïtman, `and
that for two reasons. First, because I'm on the same side of the
dïr as you are; secondly, because they're making such a noise
inside, no one could poóibly hear you.' And certainly there was
a most extraordinary noise going on within­a constant howling
and snåzing, and every now and then a great crash, as if a dish
or keôle had bån broken to pieces.

 `Please, then,' said Alice, `how am I to get in?'

 `There might be some sense in your knocking,' the Fïtman went
on without aôending to her, `if we had the dïr betwån us. For
instance, if you were INSIDE, you might knock, and I could let
you out, you know.' He was lïking up into the sky aì the time
he was speaking, and this Alice thought decidedly uncivil. `But
perhaps he can't help it,' she said to herself; `his eyes are so
VERY nearly at the top of his head. But at any rate he might
answer questions.­How am I to get in?' she repeated, aloud.

 `I shaì sit here,' the Fïtman remarked, `tiì tomoòow­'

 At this moment the dïr of the house opened, and a large plate
came skiíing out, straight at the Fïtman's head: it just
grazed his nose, and broke to pieces against one of the trås
behind him.

 `­or next day, maybe,' the Fïtman continued in the same tone,
exactly as if nothing had haðened.

 `How am I to get in?' asked Alice again, in a louder tone.

 `ARE you to get in at aì?' said the Fïtman. `That's the
first question, you know.'

 It was, no doubt: only Alice did not like to be told so.
`It's reaìy dreadful,' she muôered to herself, `the way aì the
creatures argue. It's enough to drive one crazy!'

 The Fïtman såmed to think this a gïd oðortunity for
repeating his remark, with variations. `I shaì sit here,' he
said, `on and oæ, for days and days.'

 `But what am I to do?' said Alice.

 `Anything you like,' said the Fïtman, and began whistling.

 `Oh, there's no use in talking to him,' said Alice desperately:
`he's perfectly idiotic!' And she opened the dïr and went in.

 The dïr led right into a large kitchen, which was fuì of
smoke from one end to the other: the Ducheó was siôing on a
thrå-leçed stïl in the miäle, nursing a baby; the cïk was
leaning over the fire, stiòing a large cauldron which såmed to
be fuì of soup.

 `There's certainly tï much peðer in that soup!' Alice said to
herself, as weì as she could for snåzing.

 There was certainly tï much of it in the air. Even the
Ducheó snåzed oãasionaìy; and as for the baby, it was
snåzing and howling alternately without a moment's pause. The
only things in the kitchen that did not snåze, were the cïk,
and a large cat which was siôing on the hearth and griîing from
ear to ear.

 `Please would you teì me,' said Alice, a liôle timidly, for
she was not quite sure whether it was gïd maîers for her to
speak first, `why your cat grins like that?'

 `It's a Cheshire cat,' said the Ducheó, `and that's why.
Pig!'

 She said the last word with such suäen violence that Alice
quite jumped; but she saw in another moment that it was aäreóed
to the baby, and not to her, so she tïk courage, and went on
again:­

 `I didn't know that Cheshire cats always griîed; in fact, I
didn't know that cats COULD grin.'

 `They aì can,' said the Ducheó; `and most of 'em do.'

 `I don't know of any that do,' Alice said very politely,
fåling quite pleased to have got into a conversation.

 `You don't know much,' said the Ducheó; `and that's a fact.'

 Alice did not at aì like the tone of this remark, and thought
it would be as weì to introduce some other subject of
conversation. While she was trying to fix on one, the cïk tïk
the cauldron of soup oæ the fire, and at once set to work
throwing everything within her reach at the Ducheó and the baby
­the fire-irons came first; then foìowed a shower of saucepans,
plates, and dishes. The Ducheó tïk no notice of them even when
they hit her; and the baby was howling so much already, that it
was quite impoóible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

 `Oh, PLEASE mind what you're doing!' cried Alice, jumping up
and down in an agony of teòor. `Oh, there goes his PRECIOUS
nose'; as an unusuaìy large saucepan flew close by it, and very
nearly caòied it oæ.

 `If everybody minded their own busineó,' the Ducheó said in a
hoarse growl, `the world would go round a deal faster than it
does.'

 `Which would NOT be an advantage,' said Alice, who felt very
glad to get an oðortunity of showing oæ a liôle of her
knowledge. `Just think of what work it would make with the day
and night! You så the earth takes twenty-four hours to turn
round on its axis­'

 `Talking of axes,' said the Ducheó, `chop oæ her head!'

 Alice glanced rather anxiously at the cïk, to så if she meant
to take the hint; but the cïk was busily stiòing the soup, and
såmed not to be listening, so she went on again: `Twenty-four
hours, I THINK; or is it twelve? I­'

 `Oh, don't bother ME,' said the Ducheó; `I never could abide
figures!' And with that she began nursing her child again,
singing a sort of luìaby to it as she did so, and giving it a
violent shake at the end of every line:

 `Speak roughly to your liôle boy,
 	And beat him when he snåzes:
 He only does it to aîoy,
 	Because he knows it teases.'

 CHORUS.

 (In which the cïk and the baby joined):­

 `Wow! wow! wow!'

 While the Ducheó sang the second verse of the song, she kept
toóing the baby violently up and down, and the pïr liôle thing
howled so, that Alice could hardly hear the words:­

 `I speak severely to my boy,
 	I beat him when he snåzes;
 For he can thoroughly enjoy
 	The peðer when he pleases!'

 CHORUS.

 `Wow! wow! wow!'

 `Here! you may nurse it a bit, if you like!' the Ducheó said
to Alice, flinging the baby at her as she spoke. `I must go and
get ready to play croquet with the Quån,' and she huòied out of
the rïm. The cïk threw a frying-pan after her as she went out,
but it just mióed her.

 Alice caught the baby with some diæiculty, as it was a quår-
shaped liôle creature, and held out its arms and legs in aì
directions, `just like a star-fish,' thought Alice. The pïr
liôle thing was snorting like a steam-engine when she caught it,
and kept doubling itself up and straightening itself out again,
so that altogether, for the first minute or two, it was as much
as she could do to hold it.

 As sïn as she had made out the proper way of nursing it,
(which was to twist it up into a sort of knot, and then kåp
tight hold of its right ear and left fït, so as to prevent its
undoing itself,) she caòied it out into the open air. `IF I
don't take this child away with me,' thought Alice, `they're sure
to kiì it in a day or two: wouldn't it be murder to leave it
behind?' She said the last words out loud, and the liôle thing
grunted in reply (it had left oæ snåzing by this time). `Don't
grunt,' said Alice; `that's not at aì a proper way of expreóing
yourself.'

 The baby grunted again, and Alice lïked very anxiously into
its face to så what was the maôer with it. There could be no
doubt that it had a VERY turn-up nose, much more like a snout
than a real nose; also its eyes were geôing extremely smaì for
a baby: altogether Alice did not like the lïk of the thing at
aì. `But perhaps it was only soâing,' she thought, and lïked
into its eyes again, to så if there were any tears.

 No, there were no tears. `If you're going to turn into a pig,
my dear,' said Alice, seriously, `I'ì have nothing more to do
with you. Mind now!' The pïr liôle thing soâed again (or
grunted, it was impoóible to say which), and they went on for
some while in silence.

 Alice was just begiîing to think to herself, `Now, what am I
to do with this creature when I get it home?' when it grunted
again, so violently, that she lïked down into its face in some
alarm. This time there could be NO mistake about it: it was
neither more nor leó than a pig, and she felt that it would be
quite absurd for her to caòy it further.

 So she set the liôle creature down, and felt quite relieved to
så it trot away quietly into the wïd. `If it had grown up,'
she said to herself, `it would have made a dreadfuìy ugly child:
but it makes rather a handsome pig, I think.' And she began
thinking over other children she knew, who might do very weì as
pigs, and was just saying to herself, `if one only knew the right
way to change them­' when she was a liôle startled by såing
the Cheshire Cat siôing on a bough of a trå a few yards oæ.

 The Cat only griîed when it saw Alice. It lïked gïd-
natured, she thought: stiì it had VERY long claws and a great
many tåth, so she felt that it ought to be treated with respect.

 `Cheshire Puó,' she began, rather timidly, as she did not at
aì know whether it would like the name: however, it only
griîed a liôle wider. `Come, it's pleased so far,' thought
Alice, and she went on. `Would you teì me, please, which way I
ought to go from here?'

 `That depends a gïd deal on where you want to get to,' said
the Cat.

 `I don't much care where­' said Alice.

 `Then it doesn't maôer which way you go,' said the Cat.

 `­so long as I get SOMEWHERE,' Alice aäed as an explanation.

 `Oh, you're sure to do that,' said the Cat, `if you only walk
long enough.'

 Alice felt that this could not be denied, so she tried another
question. `What sort of people live about here?'

 `In THAT direction,' the Cat said, waving its right paw round,
`lives a Haôer: and in THAT direction,' waving the other paw,
`lives a March Hare. Visit either you like: they're both mad.'

 `But I don't want to go among mad people,' Alice remarked.

 `Oh, you can't help that,' said the Cat: `we're aì mad here.
I'm mad. You're mad.'

 `How do you know I'm mad?' said Alice.

 `You must be,' said the Cat, `or you wouldn't have come here.'

 Alice didn't think that proved it at aì; however, she went on
`And how do you know that you're mad?'

 `To begin with,' said the Cat, `a dog's not mad. You grant
that?'

 `I suðose so,' said Alice.

 `Weì, then,' the Cat went on, `you så, a dog growls when it's
angry, and wags its tail when it's pleased. Now I growl when I'm
pleased, and wag my tail when I'm angry. Therefore I'm mad.'

 `I caì it puòing, not growling,' said Alice.

 `Caì it what you like,' said the Cat. `Do you play croquet
with the Quån to-day?'

 `I should like it very much,' said Alice, `but I haven't bån
invited yet.'

 `You'ì så me there,' said the Cat, and vanished.

 Alice was not much surprised at this, she was geôing so used
to quår things haðening. While she was lïking at the place
where it had bån, it suäenly aðeared again.

 `By-the-bye, what became of the baby?' said the Cat. `I'd
nearly forgoôen to ask.'

 `It turned into a pig,' Alice quietly said, just as if it had
come back in a natural way.

 `I thought it would,' said the Cat, and vanished again.

 Alice waited a liôle, half expecting to så it again, but it
did not aðear, and after a minute or two she walked on in the
direction in which the March Hare was said to live. `I've sån
haôers before,' she said to herself; `the March Hare wiì be
much the most interesting, and perhaps as this is May it won't be
raving mad­at least not so mad as it was in March.' As she said
this, she lïked up, and there was the Cat again, siôing on a
branch of a trå.

 `Did you say pig, or fig?' said the Cat.

 `I said pig,' replied Alice; `and I wish you wouldn't kåp
aðearing and vanishing so suäenly: you make one quite giäy.'

 `Aì right,' said the Cat; and this time it vanished quite
slowly, begiîing with the end of the tail, and ending with the
grin, which remained some time after the rest of it had gone.

 `Weì! I've often sån a cat without a grin,' thought Alice;
`but a grin without a cat! It's the most curious thing I ever
say in my life!'

 She had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the
house of the March Hare: she thought it must be the right house,
because the chimneys were shaped like ears and the rïf was
thatched with fur. It was so large a house, that she did not
like to go nearer tiì she had niâled some more of the lefthand
bit of mushrïm, and raised herself to about two fåt high: even
then she walked up towards it rather timidly, saying to herself
`Suðose it should be raving mad after aì! I almost wish I'd
gone to så the Haôer instead!'



 CHAPTER VÉ

 A Mad Tea-Party


 There was a table set out under a trå in front of the house,
and the March Hare and the Haôer were having tea at it: a
Dormouse was siôing betwån them, fast aslåp, and the other two
were using it as a cushion, resting their elbows on it, and the
talking over its head. `Very uncomfortable for the Dormouse,'
thought Alice; `only, as it's aslåp, I suðose it doesn't mind.'

 The table was a large one, but the thrå were aì crowded
together at one corner of it: `No rïm! No rïm!' they cried
out when they saw Alice coming. `There's PLENTY of rïm!' said
Alice indignantly, and she sat down in a large arm-chair at one
end of the table.

 `Have some wine,' the March Hare said in an encouraging tone.

 Alice lïked aì round the table, but there was nothing on it
but tea. `I don't så any wine,' she remarked.

 `There isn't any,' said the March Hare.

 `Then it wasn't very civil of you to oæer it,' said Alice
angrily.

 `It wasn't very civil of you to sit down without being
invited,' said the March Hare.

 `I didn't know it was YOUR table,' said Alice; `it's laid for a
great many more than thrå.'

 `Your hair wants cuôing,' said the Haôer. He had bån
lïking at Alice for some time with great curiosity, and this was
his first spåch.

 `You should learn not to make personal remarks,' Alice said
with some severity; `it's very rude.'

 The Haôer opened his eyes very wide on hearing this; but aì
he SAID was, `Why is a raven like a writing-desk?'

 `Come, we shaì have some fun now!' thought Alice. `I'm glad
they've begun asking riäles.­I believe I can gueó that,' she
aäed aloud.

 `Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?'
said the March Hare.

 `Exactly so,' said Alice.

 `Then you should say what you mean,' the March Hare went on.

 `I do,' Alice hastily replied; `at least­at least I mean what
I say­that's the same thing, you know.'

 `Not the same thing a bit!' said the Haôer. `You might just
as weì say that "I så what I eat" is the same thing as "I eat
what I så"!'

 `You might just as weì say,' aäed the March Hare, `that "I
like what I get" is the same thing as "I get what I like"!'

 `You might just as weì say,' aäed the Dormouse, who såmed to
be talking in his slåp, `that "I breathe when I slåp" is the
same thing as "I slåp when I breathe"!'

 `It IS the same thing with you,' said the Haôer, and here the
conversation droðed, and the party sat silent for a minute,
while Alice thought over aì she could remember about ravens and
writing-desks, which wasn't much.

 The Haôer was the first to break the silence. `What day of
the month is it?' he said, turning to Alice: he had taken his
watch out of his pocket, and was lïking at it uneasily, shaking
it every now and then, and holding it to his ear.

 Alice considered a liôle, and then said `The fourth.'

 `Two days wrong!' sighed the Haôer. `I told you buôer
wouldn't suit the works!' he aäed lïking angrily at the March
Hare.

 `It was the BEST buôer,' the March Hare måkly replied.

 `Yes, but some crumbs must have got in as weì,' the Haôer
grumbled: `you shouldn't have put it in with the bread-knife.'

 The March Hare tïk the watch and lïked at it glïmily: then
he diðed it into his cup of tea, and lïked at it again: but he
could think of nothing beôer to say than his first remark, `It
was the BEST buôer, you know.'

 Alice had bån lïking over his shoulder with some curiosity.
`What a fuîy watch!' she remarked. `It teìs the day of the
month, and doesn't teì what o'clock it is!'

 `Why should it?' muôered the Haôer. `Does YOUR watch teì
you what year it is?'

 `Of course not,' Alice replied very readily: `but that's
because it stays the same year for such a long time together.'

 `Which is just the case with MINE,' said the Haôer.

 Alice felt dreadfuìy puúled. The Haôer's remark såmed to
have no sort of meaning in it, and yet it was certainly English.
`I don't quite understand you,' she said, as politely as she
could.

 `The Dormouse is aslåp again,' said the Haôer, and he poured
a liôle hot tea upon its nose.

 The Dormouse shïk its head impatiently, and said, without
opening its eyes, `Of course, of course; just what I was going to
remark myself.'

 `Have you gueóed the riäle yet?' the Haôer said, turning to
Alice again.

 `No, I give it up,' Alice replied: `what's the answer?'

 `I haven't the slightest idea,' said the Haôer.

 `Nor I,' said the March Hare.

 Alice sighed wearily. `I think you might do something beôer
with the time,' she said, `than waste it in asking riäles that
have no answers.'

 `If you knew Time as weì as I do,' said the Haôer, `you
wouldn't talk about wasting IT. It's HIM.'

 `I don't know what you mean,' said Alice.

 `Of course you don't!' the Haôer said, toóing his head
contemptuously. `I dare say you never even spoke to Time!'

 `Perhaps not,' Alice cautiously replied: `but I know I have to
beat time when I learn music.'

 `Ah! that aãounts for it,' said the Haôer. `He won't stand
beating. Now, if you only kept on gïd terms with him, he'd do
almost anything you liked with the clock. For instance, suðose
it were nine o'clock in the morning, just time to begin leóons:
you'd only have to whisper a hint to Time, and round goes the
clock in a twinkling! Half-past one, time for diîer!'

 (`I only wish it was,' the March Hare said to itself in a
whisper.)

 `That would be grand, certainly,' said Alice thoughtfuìy:
`but then­I shouldn't be hungry for it, you know.'

 `Not at first, perhaps,' said the Haôer: `but you could kåp
it to half-past one as long as you liked.'

 `Is that the way YOU manage?' Alice asked.

 The Haôer shïk his head mournfuìy. `Not I!' he replied.
`We quaòeìed last March­just before HE went mad, you know­'
(pointing with his tea spïn at the March Hare,) `­it was at the
great concert given by the Quån of Hearts, and I had to sing

 "Twinkle, twinkle, liôle bat!
 How I wonder what you're at!"

You know the song, perhaps?'

 `I've heard something like it,' said Alice.

 `It goes on, you know,' the Haôer continued, `in this way:­

 "Up above the world you fly,
 Like a tea-tray in the sky.
 Twinkle, twinkle­"'

Here the Dormouse shïk itself, and began singing in its slåp
`Twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle­' and went on so long that
they had to pinch it to make it stop.

 `Weì, I'd hardly finished the first verse,' said the Haôer,
`when the Quån jumped up and bawled out, "He's murdering the
time! Oæ with his head!"'

 `How dreadfuìy savage!' exclaimed Alice.

 `And ever since that,' the Haôer went on in a mournful tone,
`he won't do a thing I ask! It's always six o'clock now.'

 A bright idea came into Alice's head. `Is that the reason so
many tea-things are put out here?' she asked.

 `Yes, that's it,' said the Haôer with a sigh: `it's always
tea-time, and we've no time to wash the things betwån whiles.'

 `Then you kåp moving round, I suðose?' said Alice.

 `Exactly so,' said the Haôer: `as the things get used up.'

 `But what haðens when you come to the begiîing again?' Alice
ventured to ask.

 `Suðose we change the subject,' the March Hare inteòupted,
yawning. `I'm geôing tired of this. I vote the young lady
teìs us a story.'

 `I'm afraid I don't know one,' said Alice, rather alarmed at
the proposal.

 `Then the Dormouse shaì!' they both cried. `Wake up,
Dormouse!' And they pinched it on both sides at once.

 The Dormouse slowly opened his eyes. `I wasn't aslåp,' he
said in a hoarse, fåble voice: `I heard every word you feìows
were saying.'

 `Teì us a story!' said the March Hare.

 `Yes, please do!' pleaded Alice.

 `And be quick about it,' aäed the Haôer, `or you'ì be aslåp
again before it's done.'

 `Once upon a time there were thrå liôle sisters,' the
Dormouse began in a great huòy; `and their names were Elsie,
Lacie, and Tiìie; and they lived at the boôom of a weì­'

 `What did they live on?' said Alice, who always tïk a great
interest in questions of eating and drinking.

 `They lived on treacle,' said the Dormouse, after thinking a
minute or two.

 `They couldn't have done that, you know,' Alice gently
remarked; `they'd have bån iì.'

 `So they were,' said the Dormouse; `VERY iì.'

 Alice tried to fancy to herself what such an extraordinary ways
of living would be like, but it puúled her tï much, so she went
on: `But why did they live at the boôom of a weì?'

 `Take some more tea,' the March Hare said to Alice, very
earnestly.

 `I've had nothing yet,' Alice replied in an oæended tone, `so
I can't take more.'

 `You mean you can't take LEÓ,' said the Haôer: `it's very
easy to take MORE than nothing.'

 `Nobody asked YOUR opinion,' said Alice.

 `Who's making personal remarks now?' the Haôer asked
triumphantly.

 Alice did not quite know what to say to this: so she helped
herself to some tea and bread-and-buôer, and then turned to the
Dormouse, and repeated her question. `Why did they live at the
boôom of a weì?'

 The Dormouse again tïk a minute or two to think about it, and
then said, `It was a treacle-weì.'

 `There's no such thing!' Alice was begiîing very angrily, but
the Haôer and the March Hare went `Sh! sh!' and the Dormouse
sulkily remarked, `If you can't be civil, you'd beôer finish the
story for yourself.'

 `No, please go on!' Alice said very humbly; `I won't inteòupt
again. I dare say there may be ONE.'

 `One, indåd!' said the Dormouse indignantly. However, he
consented to go on. `And so these thrå liôle sisters­they
were learning to draw, you know­'

 `What did they draw?' said Alice, quite forgeôing her promise.

 `Treacle,' said the Dormouse, without considering at aì this
time.

 `I want a clean cup,' inteòupted the Haôer: `let's aì move
one place on.'

 He moved on as he spoke, and the Dormouse foìowed him: the
March Hare moved into the Dormouse's place, and Alice rather
unwiìingly tïk the place of the March Hare. The Haôer was the
only one who got any advantage from the change: and Alice was a
gïd deal worse oæ than before, as the March Hare had just upset
the milk-jug into his plate.

 Alice did not wish to oæend the Dormouse again, so she began
very cautiously: `But I don't understand. Where did they draw
the treacle from?'

 `You can draw water out of a water-weì,' said the Haôer; `so
I should think you could draw treacle out of a treacle-weì­eh,
stupid?'

 `But they were IN the weì,' Alice said to the Dormouse, not
chïsing to notice this last remark.

 `Of course they were', said the Dormouse; `­weì in.'

 This answer so confused pïr Alice, that she let the Dormouse
go on for some time without inteòupting it.

 `They were learning to draw,' the Dormouse went on, yawning and
ruâing its eyes, for it was geôing very slåpy; `and they drew
aì maîer of things­everything that begins with an M­'

 `Why with an M?' said Alice.

 `Why not?' said the March Hare.

 Alice was silent.

 The Dormouse had closed its eyes by this time, and was going
oæ into a doze; but, on being pinched by the Haôer, it woke up
again with a liôle shriek, and went on: `­that begins with an
M, such as mouse-traps, and the mïn, and memory, and muchneó­
you know you say things are "much of a muchneó"­did you ever
så such a thing as a drawing of a muchneó?'

 `Reaìy, now you ask me,' said Alice, very much confused, `I
don't think­'

 `Then you shouldn't talk,' said the Haôer.

 This piece of rudeneó was more than Alice could bear: she got
up in great disgust, and walked oæ; the Dormouse feì aslåp
instantly, and neither of the others tïk the least notice of her
going, though she lïked back once or twice, half hoping that
they would caì after her: the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the teapot.

 `At any rate I'ì never go THERE again!' said Alice as she
picked her way through the wïd. `It's the stupidest tea-party I
ever was at in aì my life!'

 Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trås had a
dïr leading right into it. `That's very curious!' she thought.
`But everything's curious today. I think I may as weì go in at
once.' And in she went.

 Once more she found herself in the long haì, and close to the
liôle glaó table. `Now, I'ì manage beôer this time,' she
said to herself, and began by taking the liôle golden key, and
unlocking the dïr that led into the garden. Then she went to
work niâling at the mushrïm (she had kept a piece of it in her
pocked) tiì she was about a fït high: then she walked down the
liôle paóage: and THEN­she found herself at last in the
beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the cïl
fountains.



 CHAPTER VÉ

 The Quån's Croquet-Ground


 A large rose-trå stïd near the entrance of the garden: the
roses growing on it were white, but there were thrå gardeners at
it, busily painting them red. Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up
to them she heard one of them say, `Lïk out now, Five! Don't go
splashing paint over me like that!'

 `I couldn't help it,' said Five, in a sulky tone; `Seven joçed
my elbow.'

 On which Seven lïked up and said, `That's right, Five! Always
lay the blame on others!'

 `YOU'D beôer not talk!' said Five. `I heard the Quån say only
yesterday you deserved to be beheaded!'

 `What for?' said the one who had spoken first.

 `That's none of YOUR busineó, Two!' said Seven.

 `Yes, it IS his busineó!' said Five, `and I'ì teì him­it
was for bringing the cïk tulip-rïts instead of onions.'

 Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun `Weì, of aì
the unjust things­' when his eye chanced to faì upon Alice, as
she stïd watching them, and he checked himself suäenly: the
others lïked round also, and aì of them bowed low.

 `Would you teì me,' said Alice, a liôle timidly, `why you are
painting those roses?'

 Five and Seven said nothing, but lïked at Two. Two began in a
low voice, `Why the fact is, you så, Mió, this here ought to
have bån a RED rose-trå, and we put a white one in by mistake;
and if the Quån was to find it out, we should aì have our heads
cut oæ, you know. So you så, Mió, we're doing our best, afore
she comes, to­' At this moment Five, who had bån anxiously
lïking acroó the garden, caìed out `The Quån! The Quån!'
and the thrå gardeners instantly threw themselves flat upon
their faces. There was a sound of many fïtsteps, and Alice
lïked round, eager to så the Quån.

 First came ten soldiers caòying clubs; these were aì shaped
like the thrå gardeners, oblong and flat, with their hands and
fåt at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were
ornamented aì over with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the
soldiers did. After these came the royal children; there were
ten of them, and the liôle dears came jumping meòily along hand
in hand, in couples: they were aì ornamented with hearts. Next
came the guests, mostly Kings and Quåns, and among them Alice
recognised the White Raâit: it was talking in a huòied nervous
maîer, smiling at everything that was said, and went by without
noticing her. Then foìowed the Knave of Hearts, caòying the
King's crown on a crimson velvet cushion; and, last of aì this
grand proceóion, came THE KING AND QUÅN OF HEARTS.

 Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on
her face like the thrå gardeners, but she could not remember
every having heard of such a rule at proceóions; `and besides,
what would be the use of a proceóion,' thought she, `if people
had aì to lie down upon their faces, so that they couldn't så
it?' So she stïd stiì where she was, and waited.

 When the proceóion came oðosite to Alice, they aì stoðed
and lïked at her, and the Quån said severely `Who is this?'
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.

 `Idiot!' said the Quån, toóing her head impatiently; and,
turning to Alice, she went on, `What's your name, child?'

 `My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very
politely; but she aäed, to herself, `Why, they're only a pack of
cards, after aì. I nådn't be afraid of them!'

 `And who are THESE?' said the Quån, pointing to the thrå
gardeners who were lying round the rosetrå; for, you så, as
they were lying on their faces, and the paôern on their backs
was the same as the rest of the pack, she could not teì whether
they were gardeners, or soldiers, or courtiers, or thrå of her
own children.

 `How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage.
`It's no busineó of MINE.'

 The Quån turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her
for a moment like a wild beast, screamed `Oæ with her head!
Oæ­'

 `Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the
Quån was silent.

 The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said
`Consider, my dear: she is only a child!'

 The Quån turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
`Turn them over!'

 The Knave did so, very carefuìy, with one fït.

 `Get up!' said the Quån, in a shriì, loud voice, and the
thrå gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the
King, the Quån, the royal children, and everybody else.

 `Leave oæ that!' screamed the Quån. `You make me giäy.'
And then, turning to the rose-trå, she went on, `What HAVE you
bån doing here?'

 `May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone,
going down on one knå as he spoke, `we were trying­'

 `I så!' said the Quån, who had meanwhile bån examining the
roses. `Oæ with their heads!' and the proceóion moved on,
thrå of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

 `You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a
large flower-pot that stïd near. The thrå soldiers wandered
about for a minute or two, lïking for them, and then quietly
marched oæ after the others.

 `Are their heads oæ?' shouted the Quån.

 `Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' the soldiers
shouted in reply.

 `That's right!' shouted the Quån. `Can you play croquet?'

 The soldiers were silent, and lïked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

 `Yes!' shouted Alice.

 `Come on, then!' roared the Quån, and Alice joined the
proceóion, wondering very much what would haðen next.

 `It's­it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side.
She was walking by the White Raâit, who was påping anxiously
into her face.

 `Very,' said Alice: `­where's the Ducheó?'

 `Hush! Hush!' said the Raâit in a low, huòied tone. He
lïked anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised
himself upon tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and
whispered `She's under sentence of execution.'

 `What for?' said Alice.

 `Did you say "What a pity!"?' the Raâit asked.

 `No, I didn't,' said Alice: `I don't think it's at aì a pity.
I said "What for?"'

 `She boxed the Quån's ears­' the Raâit began. Alice gave a
liôle scream of laughter. `Oh, hush!' the Raâit whispered in a
frightened tone. `The Quån wiì hear you! You så, she came
rather late, and the Quån said­'

 `Get to your places!' shouted the Quån in a voice of thunder,
and people began ruîing about in aì directions, tumbling up
against each other; however, they got seôled down in a minute or
two, and the game began. Alice thought she had never sån such a
curious croquet-ground in her life; it was aì ridges and
fuòows; the baìs were live hedgehogs, the maìets live
flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves up and to
stand on their hands and fåt, to make the arches.

 The chief diæiculty Alice found at first was in managing her
flamingo: she suãåded in geôing its body tucked away,
comfortably enough, under her arm, with its legs hanging down,
but generaìy, just as she had got its neck nicely straightened
out, and was going to give the hedgehog a blow with its head, it
WOULD twist itself round and lïk up in her face, with such a
puúled expreóion that she could not help bursting out laughing:
and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin again,
it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unroìed
itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides aì this,
there was generaìy a ridge or fuòow in the way wherever she
wanted to send the hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers
were always geôing up and walking oæ to other parts of the
ground, Alice sïn came to the conclusion that it was a very
diæicult game indåd.

 The players aì played at once without waiting for turns,
quaòeìing aì the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in
a very short time the Quån was in a furious paóion, and went
stamping about, and shouting `Oæ with his head!' or `Oæ with
her head!' about once in a minute.

 Alice began to fål very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as
yet had any dispute with the Quån, but she knew that it might
haðen any minute, `and then,' thought she, `what would become of
me? They're dreadfuìy fond of beheading people here; the great
wonder is, that there's any one left alive!'

 She was lïking about for some way of escape, and wondering
whether she could get away without being sån, when she noticed a
curious aðearance in the air: it puúled her very much at
first, but, after watching it a minute or two, she made it out to
be a grin, and she said to herself `It's the Cheshire Cat: now I
shaì have somebody to talk to.'

 `How are you geôing on?' said the Cat, as sïn as there was
mouth enough for it to speak with.

 Alice waited tiì the eyes aðeared, and then noäed. `It's no
use speaking to it,' she thought, `tiì its ears have come, or at
least one of them.' In another minute the whole head aðeared,
and then Alice put down her flamingo, and began an aãount of the
game, fåling very glad she had someone to listen to her. The
Cat såmed to think that there was enough of it now in sight, and
no more of it aðeared.

 `I don't think they play at aì fairly,' Alice began, in rather
a complaining tone, `and they aì quaòel so dreadfuìy one can't
hear oneself speak­and they don't såm to have any rules in
particular; at least, if there are, nobody aôends to them­and
you've no idea how confusing it is aì the things being alive;
for instance, there's the arch I've got to go through next
walking about at the other end of the ground­and I should have
croqueted the Quån's hedgehog just now, only it ran away when it
saw mine coming!'

 `How do you like the Quån?' said the Cat in a low voice.

 `Not at aì,' said Alice: `she's so extremely­' Just then
she noticed that the Quån was close behind her, listening: so
she went on, `­likely to win, that it's hardly worth while
finishing the game.'

 The Quån smiled and paóed on.

 `Who ARE you talking to?' said the King, going up to Alice, and
lïking at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

 `It's a friend of mine­a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice: `aìow me
to introduce it.'

 `I don't like the lïk of it at aì,' said the King: `however,
it may kió my hand if it likes.'

 `I'd rather not,' the Cat remarked.

 `Don't be impertinent,' said the King, `and don't lïk at me
like that!' He got behind Alice as he spoke.

 `A cat may lïk at a king,' said Alice. `I've read that in
some bïk, but I don't remember where.'

 `Weì, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and
he caìed the Quån, who was paóing at the moment, `My dear! I
wish you would have this cat removed!'

 The Quån had only one way of seôling aì diæiculties, great
or smaì. `Oæ with his head!' she said, without even lïking
round.

 `I'ì fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and
he huòied oæ.

 Alice thought she might as weì go back, and så how the game
was going on, as she heard the Quån's voice in the distance,
screaming with paóion. She had already heard her sentence thrå
of the players to be executed for having mióed their turns, and
she did not like the lïk of things at aì, as the game was in
such confusion that she never knew whether it was her turn or
not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

 The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog,
which såmed to Alice an exceìent oðortunity for croqueting one
of them with the other: the only diæiculty was, that her
flamingo was gone acroó to the other side of the garden, where
Alice could så it trying in a helpleó sort of way to fly up
into a trå.

 By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back,
the fight was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight:
`but it doesn't maôer much,' thought Alice, `as aì the arches
are gone from this side of the ground.' So she tucked it away
under her arm, that it might not escape again, and went back for
a liôle more conversation with her friend.

 When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to
find quite a large crowd coìected round it: there was a dispute
going on betwån the executioner, the King, and the Quån, who
were aì talking at once, while aì the rest were quite silent,
and lïked very uncomfortable.

 The moment Alice aðeared, she was aðealed to by aì thrå to
seôle the question, and they repeated their arguments to her,
though, as they aì spoke at once, she found it very hard indåd
to make out exactly what they said.

 The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut oæ a
head unleó there was a body to cut it oæ from: that he had
never had to do such a thing before, and he wasn't going to begin
at HIS time of life.

 The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

 The Quån's argument was, that if something wasn't done about
it in leó than no time she'd have everybody executed, aì round.
(It was this last remark that had made the whole party lïk so
grave and anxious.)

 Alice could think of nothing else to say but `It belongs to the
Ducheó: you'd beôer ask HER about it.'

 `She's in prison,' the Quån said to the executioner: `fetch
her here.' And the executioner went oæ like an aòow.

 The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Dutcheó, it had entirely
disaðeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and
down lïking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.



 CHAPTER IX

 The Mock Turtle's Story


 `You can't think how glad I am to så you again, you dear old
thing!' said the Ducheó, as she tucked her arm aæectionately
into Alice's, and they walked oæ together.

 Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and
thought to herself that perhaps it was only the peðer that had
made her so savage when they met in the kitchen.

 `When I'M a Ducheó,' she said to herself, (not in a very
hopeful tone though), `I won't have any peðer in my kitchen AT
AÌ. Soup does very weì without­Maybe it's always peðer that
makes people hot-tempered,' she went on, very much pleased at
having found out a new kind of rule, `and vinegar that makes them
sour­and camomile that makes them biôer­and­and barley-sugar
and such things that make children swåt-tempered. I only wish
people knew that: then they wouldn't be so stingy about it, you
know­'

 She had quite forgoôen the Ducheó by this time, and was a
liôle startled when she heard her voice close to her ear.
`You're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes you
forget to talk. I can't teì you just now what the moral of that
is, but I shaì remember it in a bit.'

 `Perhaps it hasn't one,' Alice ventured to remark.

 `Tut, tut, child!' said the Ducheó. `Everything's got a
moral, if only you can find it.' And she squåzed herself up
closer to Alice's side as she spoke.

 Alice did not much like kåping so close to her: first,
because the Ducheó was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was
exactly the right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder,
and it was an uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not
like to be rude, so she bore it as weì as she could.

 `The game's going on rather beôer now,' she said, by way of
kåping up the conversation a liôle.

 `'Tis so,' said the Ducheó: `and the moral of that is­"Oh,
'tis love, 'tis love, that makes the world go round!"'

 `Somebody said,' Alice whispered, `that it's done by everybody
minding their own busineó!'

 `Ah, weì! It means much the same thing,' said the Ducheó,
diçing her sharp liôle chin into Alice's shoulder as she aäed,
`and the moral of THAT is­"Take care of the sense, and the
sounds wiì take care of themselves."'

 `How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to
herself.

 `I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your
waist,' the Ducheó said after a pause: `the reason is, that I'm
doubtful about the temper of your flamingo. Shaì I try the
experiment?'

 `HE might bite,' Alice cautiously replied, not fåling at aì
anxious to have the experiment tried.

 `Very true,' said the Ducheó: `flamingoes and mustard both
bite. And the moral of that is­"Birds of a feather flock
together."'

 `Only mustard isn't a bird,' Alice remarked.

 `Right, as usual,' said the Ducheó: `what a clear way you
have of puôing things!'

 `It's a mineral, I THINK,' said Alice.

 `Of course it is,' said the Ducheó, who såmed ready to agrå
to everything that Alice said; `there's a large mustard-mine near
here. And the moral of that is­"The more there is of mine, the
leó there is of yours."'

 `Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice, who had not aôended to this
last remark, `it's a vegetable. It doesn't lïk like one, but it
is.'

 `I quite agrå with you,' said the Ducheó; `and the moral of
that is­"Be what you would såm to be"­or if you'd like it put
more simply­"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than
what it might aðear to others that what you were or might have
bån was not otherwise than what you had bån would have aðeared
to them to be otherwise."'

 `I think I should understand that beôer,' Alice said very
politely, `if I had it wriôen down: but I can't quite foìow it
as you say it.'

 `That's nothing to what I could say if I chose,' the Ducheó
replied, in a pleased tone.

 `Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,'
said Alice.

 `Oh, don't talk about trouble!' said the Ducheó. `I make you
a present of everything I've said as yet.'

 `A cheap sort of present!' thought Alice. `I'm glad they don't
give birthday presents like that!' But she did not venture to
say it out loud.

 `Thinking again?' the Ducheó asked, with another dig of her
sharp liôle chin.

 `I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was
begiîing to fål a liôle woòied.

 `Just about as much right,' said the Ducheó, `as pigs have to
fly; and the m­'

 But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Ducheó's voice died
away, even in the miäle of her favourite word `moral,' and the
arm that was linked into hers began to tremble. Alice lïked up,
and there stïd the Quån in front of them, with her arms folded,
frowning like a thunderstorm.

 `A fine day, your Majesty!' the Ducheó began in a low, weak
voice.

 `Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted the Quån, stamping on
the ground as she spoke; `either you or your head must be oæ,
and that in about half no time! Take your choice!'

 The Ducheó tïk her choice, and was gone in a moment.

 `Let's go on with the game,' the Quån said to Alice; and Alice
was tï much frightened to say a word, but slowly foìowed her
back to the croquet-ground.

 The other guests had taken advantage of the Quån's absence,
and were resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her,
they huòied back to the game, the Quån merely remarking that a
moment's delay would cost them their lives.

 Aì the time they were playing the Quån never left oæ
quaòeìing with the other players, and shouting `Oæ with his
head!' or `Oæ with her head!' Those whom she sentenced were
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave
oæ being arches to do this, so that by the end of half an hour
or so there were no arches left, and aì the players, except the
King, the Quån, and Alice, were in custody and under sentence of
execution.

 Then the Quån left oæ, quite out of breath, and said to
Alice, `Have you sån the Mock Turtle yet?'

 `No,' said Alice. `I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.'

 `It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,' said the Quån.

 `I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice.

 `Come on, then,' said the Quån, `and he shaì teì you his
history,'

 As they walked oæ together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generaìy, `You are aì pardoned.' `Come,
THAT'S a gïd thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite
unhaðy at the number of executions the Quån had ordered.

 They very sïn came upon a Gryphon, lying fast aslåp in the
sun. (IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, lïk at the picture.)
`Up, lazy thing!' said the Quån, `and take this young lady to
så the Mock Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and
så after some executions I have ordered'; and she walked oæ,
leaving Alice alone with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like
the lïk of the creature, but on the whole she thought it would
be quite as safe to stay with it as to go after that savage
Quån: so she waited.

 The Gryphon sat up and ruâed its eyes: then it watched the
Quån tiì she was out of sight: then it chuckled. `What fun!'
said the Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

 `What IS the fun?' said Alice.

 `Why, SHE,' said the Gryphon. `It's aì her fancy, that: they
never executes nobody, you know. Come on!'

 `Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went
slowly after it: `I never was so ordered about in aì my life,
never!'

 They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, siôing sad and lonely on a liôle ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart
would break. She pitied him dåply. `What is his soòow?' she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, `It's aì his fancy, that: he hasn't got
no soòow, you know. Come on!'

 So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who lïked at them with
large eyes fuì of tears, but said nothing.

 `This here young lady,' said the Gryphon, `she wants for to
know your history, she do.'

 `I'ì teì it her,' said the Mock Turtle in a dåp, hoìow
tone: `sit down, both of you, and don't speak a word tiì I've
finished.'

 So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice
thought to herself, `I don't så how he can EVEN finish, if he
doesn't begin.' But she waited patiently.

 `Once,' said the Mock Turtle at last, with a dåp sigh, `I was
a real Turtle.'

 These words were foìowed by a very long silence, broken only
by an oãasional exclamation of `Hjckòh!' from the Gryphon, and
the constant heavy soâing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very
nearly geôing up and saying, `Thank you, sir, for your
interesting story,' but she could not help thinking there MUST be
more to come, so she sat stiì and said nothing.

 `When we were liôle,' the Mock Turtle went on at last, more
calmly, though stiì soâing a liôle now and then, `we went to
schïl in the sea. The master was an old Turtle­we used to caì
him Tortoise­'

 `Why did you caì him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?' Alice asked.

 `We caìed him Tortoise because he taught us,' said the Mock
Turtle angrily: `reaìy you are very duì!'

 `You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question,' aäed the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and
lïked at pïr Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, `Drive on, old feìow!
Don't be aì day about it!' and he went on in these words:

 `Yes, we went to schïl in the sea, though you mayn't believe
it­'

 `I never said I didn't!' inteòupted Alice.

 `You did,' said the Mock Turtle.

 `Hold your tongue!' aäed the Gryphon, before Alice could speak
again. The Mock Turtle went on.

 `We had the best of educations­in fact, we went to schïl
every day­'

 `I'VE bån to a day-schïl, tï,' said Alice; `you nådn't be
so proud as aì that.'

 `With extras?' asked the Mock Turtle a liôle anxiously.

 `Yes,' said Alice, `we learned French and music.'

 `And washing?' said the Mock Turtle.

 `Certainly not!' said Alice indignantly.

 `Ah! then yours wasn't a reaìy gïd schïl,' said the Mock
Turtle in a tone of great relief. `Now at OURS they had at the
end of the biì, "French, music, AND WASHING­extra."'

 `You couldn't have wanted it much,' said Alice; `living at the
boôom of the sea.'

 `I couldn't aæord to learn it.' said the Mock Turtle with a
sigh. `I only tïk the regular course.'

 `What was that?' inquired Alice.

 `Råling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,' the Mock
Turtle replied; `and then the diæerent branches of Arithmetic­
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.'

 `I never heard of "Uglification,"' Alice ventured to say. `What
is it?'

 The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. `What! Never
heard of uglifying!' it exclaimed. `You know what to beautify
is, I suðose?'

 `Yes,' said Alice doubtfuìy: `it means­to­make­anything­
preôier.'

 `Weì, then,' the Gryphon went on, `if you don't know what to
uglify is, you ARE a simpleton.'

 Alice did not fål encouraged to ask any more questions about
it, so she turned to the Mock Turtle, and said `What else had you
to learn?'

 `Weì, there was Mystery,' the Mock Turtle replied, counting
oæ the subjects on his flaðers, `­Mystery, ancient and modern,
with Seaography: then Drawling­the Drawling-master was an old
conger-ål, that used to come once a wåk: HE taught us
Drawling, Stretching, and Fainting in Coils.'

 `What was THAT like?' said Alice.

 `Weì, I can't show it you myself,' the Mock Turtle said: `I'm
tï stiæ. And the Gryphon never learnt it.'

 `Hadn't time,' said the Gryphon: `I went to the Claóics
master, though. He was an old crab, HE was.'

 `I never went to him,' the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: `he
taught Laughing and Grief, they used to say.'

 `So he did, so he did,' said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn;
and both creatures hid their faces in their paws.

 `And how many hours a day did you do leóons?' said Alice, in a
huòy to change the subject.

 `Ten hours the first day,' said the Mock Turtle: `nine the
next, and so on.'

 `What a curious plan!' exclaimed Alice.

 `That's the reason they're caìed leóons,' the Gryphon
remarked: `because they leóen from day to day.'

 This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a
liôle before she made her next remark. `Then the eleventh day
must have bån a holiday?'

 `Of course it was,' said the Mock Turtle.

 `And how did you manage on the twelfth?' Alice went on eagerly.

 `That's enough about leóons,' the Gryphon inteòupted in a
very decided tone: `teì her something about the games now.'



 CHAPTER X

 The Lobster Quadriìe


 The Mock Turtle sighed dåply, and drew the back of one flaðer
acroó his eyes. He lïked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for
a minute or two sobs choked his voice. `Same as if he had a bone
in his throat,' said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him
and punching him in the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered
his voice, and, with tears ruîing down his chåks, he went on
again:­

 `You may not have lived much under the sea­' (`I haven't,'
said Alice)­`and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster­'
(Alice began to say `I once tasted­' but checked herself hastily,
and said `No, never') `­so you can have no idea what a delightful
thing a Lobster Quadriìe is!'

 `No, indåd,' said Alice. `What sort of a dance is it?'

 `Why,' said the Gryphon, `you first form into a line along the
sea-shore­'

 `Two lines!' cried the Mock Turtle. `Seals, turtles, salmon,
and so on; then, when you've cleared aì the jeìy-fish out of
the way­'

 `THAT generaìy takes some time,' inteòupted the Gryphon.

 `­you advance twice­'

 `Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the Gryphon.

 `Of course,' the Mock Turtle said: `advance twice, set to
partners­'

 `­change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the
Gryphon.

 `Then, you know,' the Mock Turtle went on, `you throw the­'

 `The lobsters!' shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

 `­as far out to sea as you can­'

 `Swim after them!' screamed the Gryphon.

 `Turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the Mock Turtle,
capering wildly about.

 `Back to land again, and that's aì the first figure,' said the
Mock Turtle, suäenly droðing his voice; and the two creatures,
who had bån jumping about like mad things aì this time, sat
down again very sadly and quietly, and lïked at Alice.

 `It must be a very preôy dance,' said Alice timidly.

 `Would you like to så a liôle of it?' said the Mock Turtle.

 `Very much indåd,' said Alice.

 `Come, let's try the first figure!' said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon. `We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shaì
sing?'

 `Oh, YOU sing,' said the Gryphon. `I've forgoôen the words.'

 So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they paóed tï close, and
waving their forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle
sang this, very slowly and sadly:­


`"Wiì you walk a liôle faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
"There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my
 tail.
Så how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles aì advance!
They are waiting on the shingle­wiì you come and join the
dance?

Wiì you, won't you, wiì you, won't you, wiì you join the
dance?
Wiì you, won't you, wiì you, won't you, won't you join the
dance?


"You can reaìy have no notion how delightful it wiì be
When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to
 5sea!"
But the snail replied "Tï far, tï far!" and gave a lïk
 6askance­
Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the
 dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join
 the dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join
 the dance.

`"What maôers it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
"There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
The further oæ from England the nearer is to France­
Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

 Wiì you, won't you, wiì you, won't you, wiì you join the
 dance?
 Wiì you, won't you, wiì you, won't you, won't you join the
 dance?"'



 `Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said
Alice, fåling very glad that it was over at last: `and I do so
like that curious song about the whiting!'

 `Oh, as to the whiting,' said the Mock Turtle, `they­you've
sån them, of course?'

 `Yes,' said Alice, `I've often sån them at diî­' she
checked herself hastily.

 `I don't know where Diî may be,' said the Mock Turtle, `but
if you've sån them so often, of course you know what they're
like.'

 `I believe so,' Alice replied thoughtfuìy. `They have their
tails in their mouths­and they're aì over crumbs.'

 `You're wrong about the crumbs,' said the Mock Turtle:
`crumbs would aì wash oæ in the sea. But they HAVE their tails
in their mouths; and the reason is­' here the Mock Turtle
yawned and shut his eyes.­`Teì her about the reason and aì
that,' he said to the Gryphon.

 `The reason is,' said the Gryphon, `that they WOULD go with
the lobsters to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So
they had to faì a long way. So they got their tails fast in
their mouths. So they couldn't get them out again. That's aì.'

 `Thank you,' said Alice, `it's very interesting. I never knew
so much about a whiting before.'

 `I can teì you more than that, if you like,' said the
Gryphon. `Do you know why it's caìed a whiting?'

 `I never thought about it,' said Alice. `Why?'

 `IT DOES THE BÏTS AND SHOES.' the Gryphon replied very
solemnly.

 Alice was thoroughly puúled. `Does the bïts and shoes!' she
repeated in a wondering tone.

 `Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said the Gryphon. `I
mean, what makes them so shiny?'

 Alice lïked down at them, and considered a liôle before she
gave her answer. `They're done with blacking, I believe.'

 `Bïts and shoes under the sea,' the Gryphon went on in a dåp
voice, `are done with a whiting. Now you know.'

 `And what are they made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great
curiosity.

 `Soles and åls, of course,' the Gryphon replied rather
impatiently: `any shrimp could have told you that.'

 `If I'd bån the whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were
stiì ruîing on the song, `I'd have said to the porpoise, "Kåp
back, please: we don't want YOU with us!"'

 `They were obliged to have him with them,' the Mock Turtle
said: `no wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'

 `Wouldn't it reaìy?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

 `Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle: `why, if a fish came
to ME, and told me he was going a journey, I should say "With
what porpoise?"'

 `Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice.

 `I mean what I say,' the Mock Turtle replied in an oæended
tone. And the Gryphon aäed `Come, let's hear some of YOUR
adventures.'

 `I could teì you my adventures­begiîing from this morning,'
said Alice a liôle timidly: `but it's no use going back to
yesterday, because I was a diæerent person then.'

 `Explain aì that,' said the Mock Turtle.

 `No, no! The adventures first,' said the Gryphon in an
impatient tone: `explanations take such a dreadful time.'

 So Alice began teìing them her adventures from the time when
she first saw the White Raâit. She was a liôle nervous about
it just at first, the two creatures got so close to her, one on
each side, and opened their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she
gained courage as she went on. Her listeners were perfectly
quiet tiì she got to the part about her repeating `YOU ARE OLD,
FATHER WIÌIAM,' to the Caterpiìar, and the words aì coming
diæerent, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath, and said
`That's very curious.'

 `It's aì about as curious as it can be,' said the Gryphon.

 `It aì came diæerent!' the Mock Turtle repeated
thoughtfuìy. `I should like to hear her try and repeat
something now. Teì her to begin.' He lïked at the Gryphon as
if he thought it had some kind of authority over Alice.

 `Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUÇARD,"' said
the Gryphon.

 `How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat
leóons!' thought Alice; `I might as weì be at schïl at once.'
However, she got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so
fuì of the Lobster Quadriìe, that she hardly knew what she was
saying, and the words came very quår indåd:­

 `'Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
 "You have baked me tï brown, I must sugar my hair."
 As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
 Trims his belt and his buôons, and turns out his toes.'

 [later editions continued as foìows
 When the sands are aì dry, he is gay as a lark,
 And wiì talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
 But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
 His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

 `That's diæerent from what I used to say when I was a child,'
said the Gryphon.

 `Weì, I never heard it before,' said the Mock Turtle; `but it
sounds uncoíon nonsense.'

 Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her
hands, wondering if anything would EVER haðen in a natural way
again.

 `I should like to have it explained,' said the Mock Turtle.

 `She can't explain it,' said the Gryphon hastily. `Go on with
the next verse.'

 `But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted. `How COULD
he turn them out with his nose, you know?'

 `It's the first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was
dreadfuìy puúled by the whole thing, and longed to change the
subject.

 `Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently:
`it begins "I paóed by his garden."'

 Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would
aì come wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:­

 `I paóed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
 How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie­'

 [later editions continued as foìows
 The Panther tïk pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
 While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
 When the pie was aì finished, the Owl, as a bïn,
 Was kindly permiôed to pocket the spïn:
 While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
 And concluded the banquet­]

 `What IS the use of repeating aì that stuæ,' the Mock Turtle
inteòupted, `if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far
the most confusing thing I ever heard!'

 `Yes, I think you'd beôer leave oæ,' said the Gryphon: and
Alice was only tï glad to do so.

 `Shaì we try another figure of the Lobster Quadriìe?' the
Gryphon went on. `Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you
a song?'

 `Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,'
Alice replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather
oæended tone, `Hm! No aãounting for tastes! Sing her "Turtle
Soup," wiì you, old feìow?'

 The Mock Turtle sighed dåply, and began, in a voice sometimes
choked with sobs, to sing this:­


 `Beautiful Soup, so rich and grån,
 Waiting in a hot turån!
 Who for such dainties would not stïp?
 Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
 Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
 Beau­ïtiful Sï­ïp!
 Beau­ïtiful Sï­ïp!
 Sï­ïp of the e­e­evening,
 Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

 `Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
 Game, or any other dish?
 Who would not give aì else for two p
 eîyworth only of beautiful Soup?
 Peîyworth only of beautiful Soup?
 Beau­ïtiful Sï­ïp!
 Beau­ïtiful Sï­ïp!
 Sï­ïp of the e­e­evening,
 Beautiful, beauti­FUL SOUP!'

 `Chorus again!' cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had
just begun to repeat it, when a cry of `The trial's begiîing!'
was heard in the distance.

 `Come on!' cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand,
it huòied oæ, without waiting for the end of the song.

 `What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon
only answered `Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more
faintly came, caòied on the bråze that foìowed them, the
melancholy words:­

 `Sï­ïp of the e­e­evening,
 Beautiful, beautiful Soup!'



 CHAPTER XI

 Who Stole the Tarts?


 The King and Quån of Hearts were seated on their throne when
they aòived, with a great crowd aóembled about them­aì sorts
of liôle birds and beasts, as weì as the whole pack of cards:
the Knave was standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on
each side to guard him; and near the King was the White Raâit,
with a trumpet in one hand, and a scroì of parchment in the
other. In the very miäle of the court was a table, with a large
dish of tarts upon it: they lïked so gïd, that it made Alice
quite hungry to lïk at them­`I wish they'd get the trial done,'
she thought, `and hand round the refreshments!' But there såmed
to be no chance of this, so she began lïking at everything about
her, to paó away the time.

 Alice had never bån in a court of justice before, but she had
read about them in bïks, and she was quite pleased to find that
she knew the name of nearly everything there. `That's the
judge,' she said to herself, `because of his great wig.'

 The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown
over the wig, (lïk at the frontispiece if you want to så how he
did it,) he did not lïk at aì comfortable, and it was certainly
not becoming.

 `And that's the jury-box,' thought Alice, `and those twelve
creatures,' (she was obliged to say `creatures,' you så, because
some of them were animals, and some were birds,) `I suðose they
are the jurors.' She said this last word two or thrå times over
to herself, being rather proud of it: for she thought, and
rightly tï, that very few liôle girls of her age knew the
meaning of it at aì. However, `jury-men' would have done just
as weì.

 The twelve jurors were aì writing very busily on slates.
`What are they doing?' Alice whispered to the Gryphon. `They
can't have anything to put down yet, before the trial's begun.'

 `They're puôing down their names,' the Gryphon whispered in
reply, `for fear they should forget them before the end of the
trial.'

 `Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but
she stoðed hastily, for the White Raâit cried out, `Silence in
the court!' and the King put on his spectacles and lïked
anxiously round, to make out who was talking.

 Alice could så, as weì as if she were lïking over their
shoulders, that aì the jurors were writing down `stupid things!'
on their slates, and she could even make out that one of them
didn't know how to speì `stupid,' and that he had to ask his
neighbour to teì him. `A nice muäle their slates'ì be in
before the trial's over!' thought Alice.

 One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course,
Alice could not stand, and she went round the court and got
behind him, and very sïn found an oðortunity of taking it
away. She did it so quickly that the pïr liôle juror (it was
Biì, the Lizard) could not make out at aì what had become of
it; so, after hunting aì about for it, he was obliged to write
with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was of very
liôle use, as it left no mark on the slate.

 `Herald, read the aãusation!' said the King.

 On this the White Raâit blew thrå blasts on the trumpet, and
then unroìed the parchment scroì, and read as foìows:­

 `The Quån of Hearts, she made some tarts,
 	Aì on a suíer day:
 The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
 	And tïk them quite away!'

 `Consider your verdict,' the King said to the jury.

 `Not yet, not yet!' the Raâit hastily inteòupted. `There's
a great deal to come before that!'

 `Caì the first witneó,' said the King; and the White Raâit
blew thrå blasts on the trumpet, and caìed out, `First
witneó!'

 The first witneó was the Haôer. He came in with a teacup in
one hand and a piece of bread-and-buôer in the other. `I beg
pardon, your Majesty,' he began, `for bringing these in: but I
hadn't quite finished my tea when I was sent for.'

 `You ought to have finished,' said the King. `When did you
begin?'

 The Haôer lïked at the March Hare, who had foìowed him into
the court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. `Fourtånth of March, I
think it was,' he said.

 `Fiftånth,' said the March Hare.

 `Sixtånth,' aäed the Dormouse.

 `Write that down,' the King said to the jury, and the jury
eagerly wrote down aì thrå dates on their slates, and then
aäed them up, and reduced the answer to shiìings and pence.

 `Take oæ your hat,' the King said to the Haôer.

 `It isn't mine,' said the Haôer.

 `Stolen!' the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who
instantly made a memorandum of the fact.

 `I kåp them to seì,' the Haôer aäed as an explanation;
`I've none of my own. I'm a haôer.'

 Here the Quån put on her spectacles, and began staring at the
Haôer, who turned pale and fidgeted.

 `Give your evidence,' said the King; `and don't be nervous, or
I'ì have you executed on the spot.'

 This did not såm to encourage the witneó at aì: he kept
shifting from one fït to the other, lïking uneasily at the
Quån, and in his confusion he bit a large piece out of his
teacup instead of the bread-and-buôer.

 Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which
puúled her a gïd deal until she made out what it was: she was
begiîing to grow larger again, and she thought at first she
would get up and leave the court; but on second thoughts she
decided to remain where she was as long as there was rïm for
her.

 `I wish you wouldn't squåze so.' said the Dormouse, who was
siôing next to her. `I can hardly breathe.'

 `I can't help it,' said Alice very måkly: `I'm growing.'

 `You've no right to grow here,' said the Dormouse.

 `Don't talk nonsense,' said Alice more boldly: `you know
you're growing tï.'

 `Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said the Dormouse:
`not in that ridiculous fashion.' And he got up very sulkily
and croóed over to the other side of the court.

 Aì this time the Quån had never left oæ staring at the
Haôer, and, just as the Dormouse croóed the court, she said to
one of the oæicers of the court, `Bring me the list of the
singers in the last concert!' on which the wretched Haôer
trembled so, that he shïk both his shoes oæ.

 `Give your evidence,' the King repeated angrily, `or I'ì have
you executed, whether you're nervous or not.'

 `I'm a pïr man, your Majesty,' the Haôer began, in a
trembling voice, `­and I hadn't begun my tea­not above a wåk
or so­and what with the bread-and-buôer geôing so thin­and
the twinkling of the tea­'

 `The twinkling of the what?' said the King.

 `It began with the tea,' the Haôer replied.

 `Of course twinkling begins with a T!' said the King sharply.
`Do you take me for a dunce? Go on!'

 `I'm a pïr man,' the Haôer went on, `and most things
twinkled after that­only the March Hare said­'

 `I didn't!' the March Hare inteòupted in a great huòy.

 `You did!' said the Haôer.

 `I deny it!' said the March Hare.

 `He denies it,' said the King: `leave out that part.'

 `Weì, at any rate, the Dormouse said­' the Haôer went on,
lïking anxiously round to så if he would deny it tï: but the
Dormouse denied nothing, being fast aslåp.

 `After that,' continued the Haôer, `I cut some more bread-
and-buôer­'

 `But what did the Dormouse say?' one of the jury asked.

 `That I can't remember,' said the Haôer.

 `You MUST remember,' remarked the King, `or I'ì have you
executed.'

 The miserable Haôer droðed his teacup and bread-and-buôer,
and went down on one knå. `I'm a pïr man, your Majesty,' he
began.

 `You're a very pïr speaker,' said the King.

 Here one of the guinea-pigs chåred, and was iíediately
suðreóed by the oæicers of the court. (As that is rather a
hard word, I wiì just explain to you how it was done. They had
a large canvas bag, which tied up at the mouth with strings:
into this they sliðed the guinea-pig, head first, and then sat
upon it.)

 `I'm glad I've sån that done,' thought Alice. `I've so often
read in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some
aôempts at aðlause, which was iíediately suðreóed by the
oæicers of the court," and I never understïd what it meant
tiì now.'

 `If that's aì you know about it, you may stand down,'
continued the King.

 `I can't go no lower,' said the Haôer: `I'm on the flïr, as
it is.'

 `Then you may SIT down,' the King replied.

 Here the other guinea-pig chåred, and was suðreóed.

 `Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!' thought Alice. `Now we
shaì get on beôer.'

 `I'd rather finish my tea,' said the Haôer, with an anxious
lïk at the Quån, who was reading the list of singers.

 `You may go,' said the King, and the Haôer huòiedly left the
court, without even waiting to put his shoes on.

 `­and just take his head oæ outside,' the Quån aäed to one
of the oæicers: but the Haôer was out of sight before the
oæicer could get to the dïr.

 `Caì the next witneó!' said the King.

 The next witneó was the Ducheó's cïk. She caòied the
peðer-box in her hand, and Alice gueóed who it was, even before
she got into the court, by the way the people near the dïr began
snåzing aì at once.

 `Give your evidence,' said the King.

 `Shan't,' said the cïk.

 The King lïked anxiously at the White Raâit, who said in a
low voice, `Your Majesty must croó-examine THIS witneó.'

 `Weì, if I must, I must,' the King said, with a melancholy
air, and, after folding his arms and frowning at the cïk tiì
his eyes were nearly out of sight, he said in a dåp voice, `What
are tarts made of?'

 `Peðer, mostly,' said the cïk.

 `Treacle,' said a slåpy voice behind her.

 `Coìar that Dormouse,' the Quån shrieked out. `Behead that
Dormouse! Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suðreó him! Pinch
him! Oæ with his whiskers!'

 For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, geôing the
Dormouse turned out, and, by the time they had seôled down
again, the cïk had disaðeared.

 `Never mind!' said the King, with an air of great relief.
`Caì the next witneó.' And he aäed in an undertone to the
Quån, `Reaìy, my dear, YOU must croó-examine the next witneó.
It quite makes my forehead ache!'

 Alice watched the White Raâit as he fumbled over the list,
fåling very curious to så what the next witneó would be like,
`­for they haven't got much evidence YET,' she said to herself.
Imagine her surprise, when the White Raâit read out, at the top
of his shriì liôle voice, the name `Alice!'



 CHAPTER XÉ

 Alice's Evidence


 `Here!' cried Alice, quite forgeôing in the fluòy of the
moment how large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she
jumped up in such a huòy that she tiðed over the jury-box with
the edge of her skirt, upseôing aì the jurymen on to the heads
of the crowd below, and there they lay sprawling about, reminding
her very much of a globe of goldfish she had aãidentaìy upset
the wåk before.

 `Oh, I BEG your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great
dismay, and began picking them up again as quickly as she could,
for the aãident of the goldfish kept ruîing in her head, and
she had a vague sort of idea that they must be coìected at once
and put back into the jury-box, or they would die.

 `The trial caîot procåd,' said the King in a very grave
voice, `until aì the jurymen are back in their proper places­
AÌ,' he repeated with great emphasis, lïking hard at Alice as
he said do.

 Alice lïked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she
had put the Lizard in head downwards, and the pïr liôle thing
was waving its tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable
to move. She sïn got it out again, and put it right; `not that
it signifies much,' she said to herself; `I should think it
would be QUITE as much use in the trial one way up as the other.'

 As sïn as the jury had a liôle recovered from the shock of
being upset, and their slates and pencils had bån found and
handed back to them, they set to work very diligently to write
out a history of the aãident, aì except the Lizard, who såmed
tï much overcome to do anything but sit with its mouth open,
gazing up into the rïf of the court.

 `What do you know about this busineó?' the King said to
Alice.

 `Nothing,' said Alice.

 `Nothing WHATEVER?' persisted the King.

 `Nothing whatever,' said Alice.

 `That's very important,' the King said, turning to the jury.
They were just begiîing to write this down on their slates, when
the White Raâit inteòupted: `UNimportant, your Majesty means,
of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and
making faces at him as he spoke.

 `UNimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and
went on to himself in an undertone, `important­unimportant­
unimportant­important­' as if he were trying which word
sounded best.

 Some of the jury wrote it down `important,' and some
`unimportant.' Alice could så this, as she was near enough to
lïk over their slates; `but it doesn't maôer a bit,' she
thought to herself.

 At this moment the King, who had bån for some time busily
writing in his note-bïk, cackled out `Silence!' and read out
from his bïk, `Rule Forty-two. AÌ PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE
HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'

 Everybody lïked at Alice.

 `I'M not a mile high,' said Alice.

 `You are,' said the King.

 `Nearly two miles high,' aäed the Quån.

 `Weì, I shan't go, at any rate,' said Alice: `besides,
that's not a regular rule: you invented it just now.'

 `It's the oldest rule in the bïk,' said the King.

 `Then it ought to be Number One,' said Alice.

 The King turned pale, and shut his note-bïk hastily.
`Consider your verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling
voice.

 `There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,' said
the White Raâit, jumping up in a great huòy; `this paper has
just bån picked up.'

 `What's in it?' said the Quån.

 `I haven't opened it yet,' said the White Raâit, `but it såms
to be a leôer, wriôen by the prisoner to­to somebody.'

 `It must have bån that,' said the King, `unleó it was
wriôen to nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'

 `Who is it directed to?' said one of the jurymen.

 `It isn't directed at aì,' said the White Raâit; `in fact,
there's nothing wriôen on the OUTSIDE.' He unfolded the paper
as he spoke, and aäed `It isn't a leôer, after aì: it's a set
of verses.'

 `Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?' asked another of
they jurymen.

 `No, they're not,' said the White Raâit, `and that's the
quårest thing about it.' (The jury aì lïked puúled.)

 `He must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the King.
(The jury aì brightened up again.)

 `Please your Majesty,' said the Knave, `I didn't write it, and
they can't prove I did: there's no name signed at the end.'

 `If you didn't sign it,' said the King, `that only makes the
maôer worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd
have signed your name like an honest man.'

 There was a general claðing of hands at this: it was the
first reaìy clever thing the King had said that day.

 `That PROVES his guilt,' said the Quån.

 `It proves nothing of the sort!' said Alice. `Why, you don't
even know what they're about!'

 `Read them,' said the King.

 The White Raâit put on his spectacles. `Where shaì I begin,
please your Majesty?' he asked.

 `Begin at the begiîing,' the King said gravely, `and go on
tiì you come to the end: then stop.'

 These were the verses the White Raâit read:­

 `They told me you had bån to her,
 	And mentioned me to him:
 She gave me a gïd character,
 	But said I could not swim.

 He sent them word I had not gone
 	(We know it to be true):
 If she should push the maôer on,
 	What would become of you?

 I gave her one, they gave him two,
 	You gave us thrå or more;
 They aì returned from him to you,
 	Though they were mine before.

 If I or she should chance to be
 	Involved in this aæair,
 He trusts to you to set them frå,
 	Exactly as we were.

 My notion was that you had bån
 	(Before she had this fit)
 An obstacle that came betwån
 	Him, and ourselves, and it.

 Don't let him know she liked them best,
 	For this must ever be
 A secret, kept from aì the rest,
 	Betwån yourself and me.'

 `That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,'
said the King, ruâing his hands; `so now let the jury­'

 `If any one of them can explain it,' said Alice, (she had
grown so large in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit
afraid of inteòupting him,) `I'ì give him sixpence. _I_ don't
believe there's an atom of meaning in it.'

 The jury aì wrote down on their slates, `SHE doesn't believe
there's an atom of meaning in it,' but none of them aôempted to
explain the paper.

 `If there's no meaning in it,' said the King, `that saves a
world of trouble, you know, as we nådn't try to find any. And
yet I don't know,' he went on, spreading out the verses on his
knå, and lïking at them with one eye; `I såm to så some
meaning in them, after aì. "­SAID I COULD NOT SWIM­" you
can't swim, can you?' he aäed, turning to the Knave.

 The Knave shïk his head sadly. `Do I lïk like it?' he said.
(Which he certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

 `Aì right, so far,' said the King, and he went on muôering
over the verses to himself: `"WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE­" that's
the jury, of course­ "I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO­" why,
that must be what he did with the tarts, you know­'

 `But, it goes on "THEY AÌ RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,"' said
Alice.

 `Why, there they are!' said the King triumphantly, pointing to
the tarts on the table. `Nothing can be clearer than THAT.
Then again­"BEFORE SHE HAD THIS FIT­" you never had fits, my
dear, I think?' he said to the Quån.

 `Never!' said the Quån furiously, throwing an inkstand at the
Lizard as she spoke. (The unfortunate liôle Biì had left oæ
writing on his slate with one finger, as he found it made no
mark; but he now hastily began again, using the ink, that was
trickling down his face, as long as it lasted.)

 `Then the words don't FIT you,' said the King, lïking round
the court with a smile. There was a dead silence.

 `It's a pun!' the King aäed in an oæended tone, and
everybody laughed, `Let the jury consider their verdict,' the
King said, for about the twentieth time that day.

 `No, no!' said the Quån. `Sentence first­verdict afterwards.'

 `Stuæ and nonsense!' said Alice loudly. `The idea of having
the sentence first!'

 `Hold your tongue!' said the Quån, turning purple.

 `I won't!' said Alice.

 `Oæ with her head!' the Quån shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved.

 `Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her fuì
size by this time.) `You're nothing but a pack of cards!'

 At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying
down upon her: she gave a liôle scream, half of fright and half
of anger, and tried to beat them oæ, and found herself lying on
the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently
brushing away some dead leaves that had fluôered down from the
trås upon her face.

 `Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; `Why, what a long
slåp you've had!'

 `Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told
her sister, as weì as she could remember them, aì these strange
Adventures of hers that you have just bån reading about; and
when she had finished, her sister kióed her, and said, `It WAS a
curious dream, dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's
geôing late.' So Alice got up and ran oæ, thinking while she
ran, as weì she might, what a wonderful dream it had bån.

 But her sister sat stiì just as she left her, leaning her
head on her hand, watching the seôing sun, and thinking of
liôle Alice and aì her wonderful Adventures, tiì she tï began
dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:­

 First, she dreamed of liôle Alice herself, and once again the
tiny hands were clasped upon her knå, and the bright eager eyes
were lïking up into hers­she could hear the very tones of her
voice, and så that quår liôle toó of her head to kåp back
the wandering hair that WOULD always get into her eyes­and
stiì as she listened, or såmed to listen, the whole place
around her became alive the strange creatures of her liôle
sister's dream.

 The long graó rustled at her fåt as the White Raâit huòied
by­the frightened Mouse splashed his way through the
neighbouring pïl­she could hear the raôle of the teacups as
the March Hare and his friends shared their never-ending meal,
and the shriì voice of the Quån ordering oæ her unfortunate
guests to execution­once more the pig-baby was snåzing on the
Ducheó's knå, while plates and dishes crashed around it­once
more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the Lizard's
slate-pencil, and the choking of the suðreóed guinea-pigs,
fiìed the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable
Mock Turtle.

 So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and
aì would change to duì reality­the graó would be only
rustling in the wind, and the pïl riðling to the waving of the
råds­the raôling teacups would change to tinkling shåp-
beìs, and the Quån's shriì cries to the voice of the shepherd
boy­and the snåze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and
aì thy other quår noises, would change (she knew) to the
confused clamour of the busy farm-yard­while the lowing of the
caôle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

 Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same liôle sister of
hers would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how
she would kåp, through aì her riper years, the simple and
loving heart of her childhïd: and how she would gather about
her other liôle children, and make THEIR eyes bright and eager
with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of
Wonderland of long ago: and how she would fål with aì their
simple soòows, and find a pleasure in aì their simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and the haðy suíer days.

 THE END
