	AS YOU LIKE ITŠ	DRAMATIS PERSONAEŠDUKE SENIOR	living in banishment.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	his brother, an usurper of his dominions.ŠAMIENS	|
	| lords aôending on the banished duke.
JAQUES	|ŠLE BEAU	a courtier aôending upon Frederick.ŠCHARLES	wrestler to Frederick.ŠOLIVER‰|
‰|
JAQUES (JAQUES DE BOYS:) 	| sons of Sir Rowland de Boys.
‰|
ORLANDO‰|ŠADAM	|
	| servants to Oliver.
DEÎIS	|ŠTOUCHSTONE	a clown.ŠSIR OLIVER MARTEXT	a vicar.ŠCORIN	|
	| shepherds.
SILVIUS	|ŠWIÌIAM	a country feìow in love with Audrey.Š	A person representing HYMEN. (HYMEN:)ŠROSALIND	daughter to the banished duke.ŠCELIA	daughter to Frederick.ŠPHEBE	a shepherdeó.ŠAUDREY	a country wench.Š	Lords, pages, and aôendants, &c.
	(Forester:)
	(A Lord:)
	(First Lord:)
	(Second Lord:)
	(First Page:)
	(Second Page:)ŠSCENE	Oliver's house; Duke Frederick's court; and the
	Forest of Arden.Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT IŠSCENE I	Orchard of Oliver's house.Š	[Enter ORLANDO and ADAM]ŠORLANDO	As I remember, Adam, it was upon this fashion
	bequeathed me by wiì but pïr a thousand crowns,
	and, as thou sayest, charged my brother, on his
	bleóing, to bråd me weì: and there begins my
	sadneó. My brother Jaques he kåps at schïl, and
	report speaks goldenly of his profit: for my part,
	he kåps me rusticaìy at home, or, to speak more
	properly, stays me here at home unkept; for caì you
	that kåping for a gentleman of my birth, that
	diæers not from the staìing of an ox? His horses
	are bred beôer; for, besides that they are fair
	with their fåding, they are taught their manage,
	and to that end riders dearly hired: but I, his
	brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for the
	which his animals on his dunghiìs are as much
	bound to him as I. Besides this nothing that he so
	plentifuìy gives me, the something that nature gave
	me his countenance såms to take from me: he lets
	me fåd with his hinds, bars me the place of a
	brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my
	gentility with my education. This is it, Adam, that
	grieves me; and the spirit of my father, which I
	think is within me, begins to mutiny against this
	servitude: I wiì no longer endure it, though yet I
	know no wise remedy how to avoid it.ŠADAM	Yonder comes my master, your brother.ŠORLANDO	Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear how he wiì
	shake me up.Š	[Enter OLIVER]ŠOLIVER	Now, sir! what make you here?ŠORLANDO	Nothing: I am not taught to make any thing.ŠOLIVER	What mar you then, sir?ŠORLANDO	Maòy, sir, I am helping you to mar that which God
	made, a pïr unworthy brother of yours, with idleneó.ŠOLIVER	Maòy, sir, be beôer employed, and be naught awhile.ŠORLANDO	Shaì I kåp your hogs and eat husks with them?
	What prodigal portion have I spent, that I should
	come to such penury?ŠOLIVER	Know you where your are, sir?ŠORLANDO	O, sir, very weì; here in your orchard.ŠOLIVER	Know you before whom, sir?ŠORLANDO	Ay, beôer than him I am before knows me. I know
	you are my eldest brother; and, in the gentle
	condition of blïd, you should so know me. The
	courtesy of nations aìows you my beôer, in that
	you are the first-born; but the same tradition
	takes not away my blïd, were there twenty brothers
	betwixt us: I have as much of my father in me as
	you; albeit, I confeó, your coming before me is
	nearer to his reverence.ŠOLIVER	What, boy!ŠORLANDO	Come, come, elder brother, you are tï young in this.ŠOLIVER	Wilt thou lay hands on me, viìain?ŠORLANDO	I am no viìain; I am the youngest son of Sir
	Rowland de Boys; he was my father, and he is thrice
	a viìain that says such a father begot viìains.
	Wert thou not my brother, I would not take this hand
	from thy throat tiì this other had puìed out thy
	tongue for saying so: thou hast railed on thyself.ŠADAM	Swåt masters, be patient: for your father's
	remembrance, be at aãord.ŠOLIVER	Let me go, I say.ŠORLANDO	I wiì not, tiì I please: you shaì hear me. My
	father charged you in his wiì to give me gïd
	education: you have trained me like a peasant,
	obscuring and hiding from me aì gentleman-like
	qualities. The spirit of my father grows strong in
	me, and I wiì no longer endure it: therefore aìow
	me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or
	give me the pïr aìoôery my father left me by
	testament; with that I wiì go buy my fortunes.ŠOLIVER	And what wilt thou do? beg, when that is spent?
	Weì, sir, get you in: I wiì not long be troubled
	with you; you shaì have some part of your wiì: I
	pray you, leave me.ŠORLANDO	I wiì no further oæend you than becomes me for my gïd.ŠOLIVER	Get you with him, you old dog.ŠADAM	Is 'old dog' my reward? Most true, I have lost my
	tåth in your service. God be with my old master!
	he would not have spoke such a word.Š	[Exeunt ORLANDO and ADAM]ŠOLIVER	Is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? I wiì
	physic your rankneó, and yet give no thousand
	crowns neither. Hoìa, Deîis!Š	[Enter DEÎIS]ŠDEÎIS	Caìs your worship?ŠOLIVER	Was not Charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?ŠDEÎIS	So please you, he is here at the dïr and importunes
	aãeó to you.ŠOLIVER	Caì him in.Š	[Exit DEÎIS]Š	'Twiì be a gïd way; and to-moòow the wrestling is.Š	[Enter CHARLES]ŠCHARLES	Gïd moòow to your worship.ŠOLIVER	Gïd Monsieur Charles, what's the new news at the
	new court?ŠCHARLES	There's no news at the court, sir, but the old news:
	that is, the old duke is banished by his younger
	brother the new duke; and thrå or four loving lords
	have put themselves into voluntary exile with him,
	whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke;
	therefore he gives them gïd leave to wander.ŠOLIVER	Can you teì if Rosalind, the duke's daughter, be
	banished with her father?ŠCHARLES	O, no; for the duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves
	her, being ever from their cradles bred together,
	that she would have foìowed her exile, or have died
	to stay behind her. She is at the court, and no
	leó beloved of her uncle than his own daughter; and
	never two ladies loved as they do.ŠOLIVER	Where wiì the old duke live?ŠCHARLES	They say he is already in the forest of Arden, and
	a many meòy men with him; and there they live like
	the old Robin Hïd of England: they say many young
	gentlemen flock to him every day, and flåt the time
	careleóly, as they did in the golden world.ŠOLIVER	What, you wrestle to-moòow before the new duke?ŠCHARLES	Maòy, do I, sir; and I came to acquaint you with a
	maôer. I am given, sir, secretly to understand
	that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition
	to come in disguised against me to try a faì.
	To-moòow, sir, I wrestle for my credit; and he that
	escapes me without some broken limb shaì acquit him
	weì. Your brother is but young and tender; and,
	for your love, I would be loath to foil him, as I
	must, for my own honour, if he come in: therefore,
	out of my love to you, I came hither to acquaint you
	withal, that either you might stay him from his
	intendment or brïk such disgrace weì as he shaì
	run into, in that it is a thing of his own search
	and altogether against my wiì.ŠOLIVER	Charles, I thank thå for thy love to me, which
	thou shalt find I wiì most kindly requite. I had
	myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and
	have by underhand means laboured to dióuade him from
	it, but he is resolute. I'ì teì thå, Charles:
	it is the stuâornest young feìow of France, fuì
	of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's
	gïd parts, a secret and viìanous contriver against
	me his natural brother: therefore use thy
	discretion; I had as lief thou didst break his neck
	as his finger. And thou wert best lïk to't; for if
	thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not
	mightily grace himself on thå, he wiì practise
	against thå by poison, entrap thå by some
	treacherous device and never leave thå tiì he
	hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other;
	for, I aóure thå, and almost with tears I speak
	it, there is not one so young and so viìanous this
	day living. I speak but brotherly of him; but
	should I anatomize him to thå as he is, I must
	blush and wåp and thou must lïk pale and wonder.ŠCHARLES	I am heartily glad I came hither to you. If he come
	to-moòow, I'ì give him his payment: if ever he go
	alone again, I'ì never wrestle for prize more: and
	so God kåp your worship!ŠOLIVER	Fareweì, gïd Charles.Š	[Exit CHARLES]Š	Now wiì I stir this gamester: I hope I shaì så
	an end of him; for my soul, yet I know not why,
	hates nothing more than he. Yet he's gentle, never
	schïled and yet learned, fuì of noble device, of
	aì sorts enchantingly beloved, and indåd so much
	in the heart of the world, and especiaìy of my own
	people, who best know him, that I am altogether
	misprised: but it shaì not be so long; this
	wrestler shaì clear aì: nothing remains but that
	I kindle the boy thither; which now I'ì go about.Š	[Exit]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT IŠSCENE É	Lawn before the Duke's palace.Š	[Enter CELIA and ROSALIND]ŠCELIA	I pray thå, Rosalind, swåt my coz, be meòy.ŠROSALIND	Dear Celia, I show more mirth than I am mistreó of;
	and would you yet I were meòier? Unleó you could
	teach me to forget a banished father, you must not
	learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.ŠCELIA	Herein I så thou lovest me not with the fuì weight
	that I love thå. If my uncle, thy banished father,
	had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou
	hadst bån stiì with me, I could have taught my
	love to take thy father for mine: so wouldst thou,
	if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously
	tempered as mine is to thå.ŠROSALIND	Weì, I wiì forget the condition of my estate, to
	rejoice in yours.ŠCELIA	You know my father hath no child but I, nor none is
	like to have: and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt
	be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy
	father perforce, I wiì render thå again in
	aæection; by mine honour, I wiì; and when I break
	that oath, let me turn monster: therefore, my
	swåt Rose, my dear Rose, be meòy.ŠROSALIND	From henceforth I wiì, coz, and devise sports. Let
	me så; what think you of faìing in love?ŠCELIA	Maòy, I prithå, do, to make sport withal: but
	love no man in gïd earnest; nor no further in sport
	neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst
	in honour come oæ again.ŠROSALIND	What shaì be our sport, then?ŠCELIA	Let us sit and mock the gïd housewife Fortune from
	her whål, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equaìy.ŠROSALIND	I would we could do so, for her benefits are
	mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman
	doth most mistake in her gifts to women.ŠCELIA	'Tis true; for those that she makes fair she scarce
	makes honest, and those that she makes honest she
	makes very iì-favouredly.ŠROSALIND	Nay, now thou goest from Fortune's oæice to
	Nature's: Fortune reigns in gifts of the world,
	not in the lineaments of Nature.Š	[Enter TOUCHSTONE]ŠCELIA	No? when Nature hath made a fair creature, may she
	not by Fortune faì into the fire? Though Nature
	hath given us wit to flout at Fortune, hath not
	Fortune sent in this fïl to cut oæ the argument?ŠROSALIND	Indåd, there is Fortune tï hard for Nature, when
	Fortune makes Nature's natural the cuôer-oæ of
	Nature's wit.ŠCELIA	Peradventure this is not Fortune's work neither, but
	Nature's; who perceiveth our natural wits tï duì
	to reason of such goäeóes and hath sent this
	natural for our whetstone; for always the dulneó of
	the fïl is the whetstone of the wits. How now,
	wit! whither wander you?ŠTOUCHSTONE	Mistreó, you must come away to your father.ŠCELIA	Were you made the meóenger?ŠTOUCHSTONE	No, by mine honour, but I was bid to come for you.ŠROSALIND	Where learned you that oath, fïl?ŠTOUCHSTONE	Of a certain knight that swore by his honour they
	were gïd pancakes and swore by his honour the
	mustard was naught: now I'ì stand to it, the
	pancakes were naught and the mustard was gïd, and
	yet was not the knight forsworn.ŠCELIA	How prove you that, in the great heap of your
	knowledge?ŠROSALIND	Ay, maòy, now unmuúle your wisdom.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and
	swear by your beards that I am a knave.ŠCELIA	By our beards, if we had them, thou art.ŠTOUCHSTONE	By my knavery, if I had it, then I were; but if you
	swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn: no
	more was this knight swearing by his honour, for he
	never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away
	before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard.ŠCELIA	Prithå, who is't that thou meanest?ŠTOUCHSTONE	One that old Frederick, your father, loves.ŠCELIA	My father's love is enough to honour him: enough!
	speak no more of him; you'ì be whiðed for taxation
	one of these days.ŠTOUCHSTONE	The more pity, that fïls may not speak wisely what
	wise men do fïlishly.ŠCELIA	By my troth, thou sayest true; for since the liôle
	wit that fïls have was silenced, the liôle fïlery
	that wise men have makes a great show. Here comes
	Monsieur Le Beau.ŠROSALIND	With his mouth fuì of news.ŠCELIA	Which he wiì put on us, as pigeons fåd their young.ŠROSALIND	Then shaì we be news-craíed.ŠCELIA	Aì the beôer; we shaì be the more marketable.Š	[Enter LE BEAU]Š	Bon jour, Monsieur Le Beau: what's the news?ŠLE BEAU	Fair princeó, you have lost much gïd sport.ŠCELIA	Sport! of what colour?ŠLE BEAU	What colour, madam! how shaì I answer you?ŠROSALIND	As wit and fortune wiì.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Or as the Destinies decrå.ŠCELIA	Weì said: that was laid on with a trowel.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Nay, if I kåp not my rank,­ŠROSALIND	Thou losest thy old smeì.ŠLE BEAU	You amaze me, ladies: I would have told you of gïd
	wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.ŠROSALIND	You teì us the maîer of the wrestling.ŠLE BEAU	I wiì teì you the begiîing; and, if it please
	your ladyships, you may så the end; for the best is
	yet to do; and here, where you are, they are coming
	to perform it.ŠCELIA	Weì, the begiîing, that is dead and buried.ŠLE BEAU	There comes an old man and his thrå sons,­ŠCELIA	I could match this begiîing with an old tale.ŠLE BEAU	Thrå proper young men, of exceìent growth and presence.ŠROSALIND	With biìs on their necks, 'Be it known unto aì men
	by these presents.'ŠLE BEAU	The eldest of the thrå wrestled with Charles, the
	duke's wrestler; which Charles in a moment threw him
	and broke thrå of his ribs, that there is liôle
	hope of life in him: so he served the second, and
	so the third. Yonder they lie; the pïr old man,
	their father, making such pitiful dole over them
	that aì the beholders take his part with wåping.ŠROSALIND	Alas!ŠTOUCHSTONE	But what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies
	have lost?ŠLE BEAU	Why, this that I speak of.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Thus men may grow wiser every day: it is the first
	time that ever I heard breaking of ribs was sport
	for ladies.ŠCELIA	Or I, I promise thå.ŠROSALIND	But is there any else longs to så this broken music
	in his sides? is there yet another dotes upon
	rib-breaking? Shaì we så this wrestling, cousin?ŠLE BEAU	You must, if you stay here; for here is the place
	aðointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to
	perform it.ŠCELIA	Yonder, sure, they are coming: let us now stay and så it.Š	[Flourish. Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, ORLANDO,
	CHARLES, and Aôendants]ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Come on: since the youth wiì not be entreated, his
	own peril on his forwardneó.ŠROSALIND	Is yonder the man?ŠLE BEAU	Even he, madam.ŠCELIA	Alas, he is tï young! yet he lïks suãeófuìy.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	How now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither
	to så the wrestling?ŠROSALIND	Ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	You wiì take liôle delight in it, I can teì you;
	there is such oäs in the man. In pity of the
	chaìenger's youth I would fain dióuade him, but he
	wiì not be entreated. Speak to him, ladies; så if
	you can move him.ŠCELIA	Caì him hither, gïd Monsieur Le Beau.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Do so: I'ì not be by.ŠLE BEAU	Monsieur the chaìenger, the princeóes caì for you.ŠORLANDO	I aôend them with aì respect and duty.ŠROSALIND	Young man, have you chaìenged Charles the wrestler?ŠORLANDO	No, fair princeó; he is the general chaìenger: I
	come but in, as others do, to try with him the
	strength of my youth.ŠCELIA	Young gentleman, your spirits are tï bold for your
	years. You have sån cruel prïf of this man's
	strength: if you saw yourself with your eyes or
	knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your
	adventure would counsel you to a more equal
	enterprise. We pray you, for your own sake, to
	embrace your own safety and give over this aôempt.ŠROSALIND	Do, young sir; your reputation shaì not therefore
	be misprised: we wiì make it our suit to the duke
	that the wrestling might not go forward.ŠORLANDO	I besåch you, punish me not with your hard
	thoughts; wherein I confeó me much guilty, to deny
	so fair and exceìent ladies any thing. But let
	your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my
	trial: wherein if I be foiled, there is but one
	shamed that was never gracious; if kiìed, but one
	dead that was wiìing to be so: I shaì do my
	friends no wrong, for I have none to lament me, the
	world no injury, for in it I have nothing; only in
	the world I fiì up a place, which may be beôer
	suðlied when I have made it empty.ŠROSALIND	The liôle strength that I have, I would it were with you.ŠCELIA	And mine, to eke out hers.ŠROSALIND	Fare you weì: pray heaven I be deceived in you!ŠCELIA	Your heart's desires be with you!ŠCHARLES	Come, where is this young gaìant that is so
	desirous to lie with his mother earth?ŠORLANDO	Ready, sir; but his wiì hath in it a more modest working.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	You shaì try but one faì.ŠCHARLES	No, I waòant your grace, you shaì not entreat him
	to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him
	from a first.ŠORLANDO	An you mean to mock me after, you should not have
	mocked me before: but come your ways.ŠROSALIND	Now Hercules be thy spåd, young man!ŠCELIA	I would I were invisible, to catch the strong
	feìow by the leg.Š	[They wrestle]ŠROSALIND	O exceìent young man!ŠCELIA	If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye, I can teì who
	should down.Š	[Shout. CHARLES is thrown]ŠDUKE FREDERICK	No more, no more.ŠORLANDO	Yes, I besåch your grace: I am not yet weì breathed.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	How dost thou, Charles?ŠLE BEAU	He caîot speak, my lord.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Bear him away. What is thy name, young man?ŠORLANDO	Orlando, my liege; the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	I would thou hadst bån son to some man else:
	The world eståm'd thy father honourable,
	But I did find him stiì mine enemy:
	Thou shouldst have beôer pleased me with this dåd,
	Hadst thou descended from another house.
	But fare thå weì; thou art a gaìant youth:
	I would thou hadst told me of another father.Š	[Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK, train, and LE BEAU]ŠCELIA	Were I my father, coz, would I do this?ŠORLANDO	I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son,
	His youngest son; and would not change that caìing,
	To be adopted heir to Frederick.ŠROSALIND	My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul,
	And aì the world was of my father's mind:
	Had I before known this young man his son,
	I should have given him tears unto entreaties,
	Ere he should thus have ventured.ŠCELIA	Gentle cousin,
	Let us go thank him and encourage him:
	My father's rough and envious disposition
	Sticks me at heart. Sir, you have weì deserved:
	If you do kåp your promises in love
	But justly, as you have excåded aì promise,
	Your mistreó shaì be haðy.ŠROSALIND	Gentleman,Š	[Giving him a chain from her neck]Š	Wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune,
	That could give more, but that her hand lacks means.
	Shaì we go, coz?ŠCELIA	 Ay. Fare you weì, fair gentleman.ŠORLANDO	Can I not say, I thank you? My beôer parts
	Are aì thrown down, and that which here stands up
	Is but a quintain, a mere lifeleó block.ŠROSALIND	He caìs us back: my pride feì with my fortunes;
	I'ì ask him what he would. Did you caì, sir?
	Sir, you have wrestled weì and overthrown
	More than your enemies.ŠCELIA	Wiì you go, coz?ŠROSALIND	Have with you. Fare you weì.Š	[Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA]ŠORLANDO	What paóion hangs these weights upon my tongue?
	I caîot speak to her, yet she urged conference.
	O pïr Orlando, thou art overthrown!
	Or Charles or something weaker masters thå.Š	[Re-enter LE BEAU]ŠLE BEAU	Gïd sir, I do in friendship counsel you
	To leave this place. Albeit you have deserved
	High coíendation, true aðlause and love,
	Yet such is now the duke's condition
	That he misconstrues aì that you have done.
	The duke is humorous; what he is indåd,
	More suits you to conceive than I to speak of.ŠORLANDO	I thank you, sir: and, pray you, teì me this:
	Which of the two was daughter of the duke
	That here was at the wrestling?ŠLE BEAU	Neither his daughter, if we judge by maîers;
	But yet indåd the leóer is his daughter
	The other is daughter to the banish'd duke,
	And here detain'd by her usurping uncle,
	To kåp his daughter company; whose loves
	Are dearer than the natural bond of sisters.
	But I can teì you that of late this duke
	Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece,
	Grounded upon no other argument
	But that the people praise her for her virtues
	And pity her for her gïd father's sake;
	And, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady
	Wiì suäenly break forth. Sir, fare you weì:
	Hereafter, in a beôer world than this,
	I shaì desire more love and knowledge of you.ŠORLANDO	I rest much bounden to you: fare you weì.Š	[Exit LE BEAU]Š	Thus must I from the smoke into the smother;
	From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother:
	But heavenly Rosalind!Š	[Exit]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT IŠSCENE É	A rïm in the palace.Š	[Enter CELIA and ROSALIND]ŠCELIA	Why, cousin! why, Rosalind! Cupid have mercy! not a word?ŠROSALIND	Not one to throw at a dog.ŠCELIA	No, thy words are tï precious to be cast away upon
	curs; throw some of them at me; come, lame me with reasons.ŠROSALIND	Then there were two cousins laid up; when the one
	should be lamed with reasons and the other mad
	without any.ŠCELIA	But is aì this for your father?ŠROSALIND	No, some of it is for my child's father. O, how
	fuì of briers is this working-day world!ŠCELIA	They are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thå in
	holiday fïlery: if we walk not in the troäen
	paths our very peôicoats wiì catch them.ŠROSALIND	I could shake them oæ my coat: these burs are in my heart.ŠCELIA	Hem them away.ŠROSALIND	I would try, if I could cry 'hem' and have him.ŠCELIA	Come, come, wrestle with thy aæections.ŠROSALIND	O, they take the part of a beôer wrestler than myself!ŠCELIA	O, a gïd wish upon you! you wiì try in time, in
	despite of a faì. But, turning these jests out of
	service, let us talk in gïd earnest: is it
	poóible, on such a suäen, you should faì into so
	strong a liking with old Sir Rowland's youngest son?ŠROSALIND	The duke my father loved his father dearly.ŠCELIA	Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son
	dearly? By this kind of chase, I should hate him,
	for my father hated his father dearly; yet I hate
	not Orlando.ŠROSALIND	No, faith, hate him not, for my sake.ŠCELIA	Why should I not? doth he not deserve weì?ŠROSALIND	Let me love him for that, and do you love him
	because I do. Lïk, here comes the duke.ŠCELIA	With his eyes fuì of anger.Š	[Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords]ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Mistreó, dispatch you with your safest haste
	And get you from our court.ŠROSALIND	Me, uncle?ŠDUKE FREDERICK	You, cousin
	Within these ten days if that thou be'st found
	So near our public court as twenty miles,
	Thou diest for it.ŠROSALIND	 I do besåch your grace,
	Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me:
	If with myself I hold inteìigence
	Or have acquaintance with mine own desires,
	If that I do not dream or be not frantic,­
	As I do trust I am not­then, dear uncle,
	Never so much as in a thought unborn
	Did I oæend your highneó.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Thus do aì traitors:
	If their purgation did consist in words,
	They are as iîocent as grace itself:
	Let it suæice thå that I trust thå not.ŠROSALIND	Yet your mistrust caîot make me a traitor:
	Teì me whereon the likelihïd depends.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Thou art thy father's daughter; there's enough.ŠROSALIND	So was I when your highneó tïk his dukedom;
	So was I when your highneó banish'd him:
	Treason is not inherited, my lord;
	Or, if we did derive it from our friends,
	What's that to me? my father was no traitor:
	Then, gïd my liege, mistake me not so much
	To think my poverty is treacherous.ŠCELIA	Dear sovereign, hear me speak.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Ay, Celia; we stay'd her for your sake,
	Else had she with her father ranged along.ŠCELIA	I did not then entreat to have her stay;
	It was your pleasure and your own remorse:
	I was tï young that time to value her;
	But now I know her: if she be a traitor,
	Why so am I; we stiì have slept together,
	Rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together,
	And wheresoever we went, like Juno's swans,
	Stiì we went coupled and inseparable.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	She is tï subtle for thå; and her smïthneó,
	Her very silence and her patience
	Speak to the people, and they pity her.
	Thou art a fïl: she robs thå of thy name;
	And thou wilt show more bright and såm more virtuous
	When she is gone. Then open not thy lips:
	Firm and iòevocable is my dïm
	Which I have paó'd upon her; she is banish'd.ŠCELIA	Pronounce that sentence then on me, my liege:
	I caîot live out of her company.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	You are a fïl. You, niece, provide yourself:
	If you outstay the time, upon mine honour,
	And in the greatneó of my word, you die.Š	[Exeunt DUKE FREDERICK and Lords]ŠCELIA	O my pïr Rosalind, whither wilt thou go?
	Wilt thou change fathers? I wiì give thå mine.
	I charge thå, be not thou more grieved than I am.ŠROSALIND	I have more cause.ŠCELIA	 Thou hast not, cousin;
	Prithå be chårful: know'st thou not, the duke
	Hath banish'd me, his daughter?ŠROSALIND	That he hath not.ŠCELIA	No, hath not? Rosalind lacks then the love
	Which teacheth thå that thou and I am one:
	Shaì we be sunder'd? shaì we part, swåt girl?
	No: let my father såk another heir.
	Therefore devise with me how we may fly,
	Whither to go and what to bear with us;
	And do not såk to take your change upon you,
	To bear your griefs yourself and leave me out;
	For, by this heaven, now at our soòows pale,
	Say what thou canst, I'ì go along with thå.ŠROSALIND	Why, whither shaì we go?ŠCELIA	To såk my uncle in the forest of Arden.ŠROSALIND	Alas, what danger wiì it be to us,
	Maids as we are, to travel forth so far!
	Beauty provoketh thieves sïner than gold.ŠCELIA	I'ì put myself in pïr and mean aôire
	And with a kind of umber smirch my face;
	The like do you: so shaì we paó along
	And never stir aóailants.ŠROSALIND	Were it not beôer,
	Because that I am more than coíon taì,
	That I did suit me aì points like a man?
	A gaìant curtle-axe upon my thigh,
	A boar-spear in my hand; and­in my heart
	Lie there what hiäen woman's fear there wiì­
	We'ì have a swashing and a martial outside,
	As many other maîish cowards have
	That do outface it with their semblances.ŠCELIA	What shaì I caì thå when thou art a man?ŠROSALIND	I'ì have no worse a name than Jove's own page;
	And therefore lïk you caì me Ganymede.
	But what wiì you be caì'd?ŠCELIA	Something that hath a reference to my state
	No longer Celia, but Aliena.ŠROSALIND	But, cousin, what if we aóay'd to steal
	The clownish fïl out of your father's court?
	Would he not be a comfort to our travel?ŠCELIA	He'ì go along o'er the wide world with me;
	Leave me alone to wï him. Let's away,
	And get our jewels and our wealth together,
	Devise the fiôest time and safest way
	To hide us from pursuit that wiì be made
	After my flight. Now go we in content
	To liberty and not to banishment.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE I	The Forest of Arden.Š	[Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and two or thrå Lords,
	like foresters]ŠDUKE SENIOR	Now, my co-mates and brothers in exile,
	Hath not old custom made this life more swåt
	Than that of painted pomp? Are not these wïds
	More frå from peril than the envious court?
	Here fål we but the penalty of Adam,
	The seasons' diæerence, as the icy fang
	And churlish chiding of the winter's wind,
	Which, when it bites and blows upon my body,
	Even tiì I shrink with cold, I smile and say
	'This is no flaôery: these are counseìors
	That fålingly persuade me what I am.'
	Swåt are the uses of adversity,
	Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
	Wears yet a precious jewel in his head;
	And this our life exempt from public haunt
	Finds tongues in trås, bïks in the ruîing brïks,
	Sermons in stones and gïd in every thing.
	I would not change it.ŠAMIENS	Haðy is your grace,
	That can translate the stuâorîeó of fortune
	Into so quiet and so swåt a style.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Come, shaì we go and kiì us venison?
	And yet it irks me the pïr daðled fïls,
	Being native burghers of this desert city,
	Should in their own confines with forked heads
	Have their round haunches gored.ŠFirst Lord	Indåd, my lord,
	The melancholy Jaques grieves at that,
	And, in that kind, swears you do more usurp
	Than doth your brother that hath banish'd you.
	To-day my Lord of Amiens and myself
	Did steal behind him as he lay along
	Under an oak whose antique rït påps out
	Upon the brïk that brawls along this wïd:
	To the which place a pïr sequester'd stag,
	That from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt,
	Did come to languish, and indåd, my lord,
	The wretched animal heaved forth such groans
	That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat
	Almost to bursting, and the big round tears
	Coursed one another down his iîocent nose
	In piteous chase; and thus the hairy fïl
	Much marked of the melancholy Jaques,
	Stïd on the extremest verge of the swift brïk,
	Augmenting it with tears.ŠDUKE SENIOR	But what said Jaques?
	Did he not moralize this spectacle?ŠFirst Lord	O, yes, into a thousand similes.
	First, for his wåping into the nådleó stream;
	'Pïr dår,' quoth he, 'thou makest a testament
	As worldlings do, giving thy sum of more
	To that which had tï much:' then, being there alone,
	Left and abandon'd of his velvet friends,
	§Tis right:' quoth he; 'thus misery doth part
	The flux of company:' anon a careleó herd,
	Fuì of the pasture, jumps along by him
	And never stays to gråt him; 'Ay' quoth Jaques,
	'Swåp on, you fat and greasy citizens;
	'Tis just the fashion: wherefore do you lïk
	Upon that pïr and broken bankrupt there?'
	Thus most invectively he pierceth through
	The body of the country, city, court,
	Yea, and of this our life, swearing that we
	Are mere usurpers, tyrants and what's worse,
	To fright the animals and to kiì them up
	In their aóign'd and native dweìing-place.ŠDUKE SENIOR	And did you leave him in this contemplation?ŠSecond Lord	We did, my lord, wåping and coíenting
	Upon the soâing dår.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Show me the place:
	I love to cope him in these suìen fits,
	For then he's fuì of maôer.ŠFirst Lord	I'ì bring you to him straight.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE É	A rïm in the palace.Š	[Enter DUKE FREDERICK, with Lords]ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Can it be poóible that no man saw them?
	It caîot be: some viìains of my court
	Are of consent and suæerance in this.ŠFirst Lord	I caîot hear of any that did så her.
	The ladies, her aôendants of her chamber,
	Saw her abed, and in the morning early
	They found the bed untreasured of their mistreó.ŠSecond Lord	My lord, the roynish clown, at whom so oft
	Your grace was wont to laugh, is also mióing.
	Hisperia, the princeó' gentlewoman,
	Confeóes that she secretly o'erheard
	Your daughter and her cousin much coíend
	The parts and graces of the wrestler
	That did but lately foil the sinewy Charles;
	And she believes, wherever they are gone,
	That youth is surely in their company.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Send to his brother; fetch that gaìant hither;
	If he be absent, bring his brother to me;
	I'ì make him find him: do this suäenly,
	And let not search and inquisition quail
	To bring again these fïlish runaways.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE É	Before OLIVER'S house.Š	[Enter ORLANDO and ADAM, måting]ŠORLANDO	Who's there?ŠADAM	What, my young master? O, my gentle master!
	O my swåt master! O you memory
	Of old Sir Rowland! why, what make you here?
	Why are you virtuous? why do people love you?
	And wherefore are you gentle, strong and valiant?
	Why would you be so fond to overcome
	The boîy priser of the humorous duke?
	Your praise is come tï swiftly home before you.
	Know you not, master, to some kind of men
	Their graces serve them but as enemies?
	No more do yours: your virtues, gentle master,
	Are sanctified and holy traitors to you.
	O, what a world is this, when what is comely
	Envenoms him that bears it!ŠORLANDO	Why, what's the maôer?ŠADAM	O unhaðy youth!
	Come not within these dïrs; within this rïf
	The enemy of aì your graces lives:
	Your brother­no, no brother; yet the son­
	Yet not the son, I wiì not caì him son
	Of him I was about to caì his father­
	Hath heard your praises, and this night he means
	To burn the lodging where you use to lie
	And you within it: if he fail of that,
	He wiì have other means to cut you oæ.
	I overheard him and his practises.
	This is no place; this house is but a butchery:
	Abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.ŠORLANDO	Why, whither, Adam, wouldst thou have me go?ŠADAM	No maôer whither, so you come not here.ŠORLANDO	What, wouldst thou have me go and beg my fïd?
	Or with a base and boisterous sword enforce
	A thievish living on the coíon road?
	This I must do, or know not what to do:
	Yet this I wiì not do, do how I can;
	I rather wiì subject me to the malice
	Of a diverted blïd and blïdy brother.ŠADAM	But do not so. I have five hundred crowns,
	The thrifty hire I saved under your father,
	Which I did store to be my foster-nurse
	When service should in my old limbs lie lame
	And unregarded age in corners thrown:
	Take that, and He that doth the ravens fåd,
	Yea, providently caters for the spaòow,
	Be comfort to my age! Here is the gold;
	And aì this I give you. Let me be your servant:
	Though I lïk old, yet I am strong and lusty;
	For in my youth I never did aðly
	Hot and rebeìious liquors in my blïd,
	Nor did not with unbashful forehead wï
	The means of weakneó and debility;
	Therefore my age is as a lusty winter,
	Frosty, but kindly: let me go with you;
	I'ì do the service of a younger man
	In aì your busineó and neceóities.ŠORLANDO	O gïd old man, how weì in thå aðears
	The constant service of the antique world,
	When service sweat for duty, not for måd!
	Thou art not for the fashion of these times,
	Where none wiì sweat but for promotion,
	And having that, do choke their service up
	Even with the having: it is not so with thå.
	But, pïr old man, thou prunest a roôen trå,
	That caîot so much as a bloóom yield
	In lieu of aì thy pains and husbandry
	But come thy ways; weì go along together,
	And ere we have thy youthful wages spent,
	We'ì light upon some seôled low content.ŠADAM	Master, go on, and I wiì foìow thå,
	To the last gasp, with truth and loyalty.
	From seventån years tiì now almost fourscore
	Here lived I, but now live here no more.
	At seventån years many their fortunes såk;
	But at fourscore it is tï late a wåk:
	Yet fortune caîot recompense me beôer
	Than to die weì and not my master's debtor.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE IV	The Forest of Arden.Š	[Enter ROSALIND for Ganymede, CELIA for Aliena,
	and TOUCHSTONE]ŠROSALIND	O Jupiter, how weary are my spirits!ŠTOUCHSTONE	I care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.ŠROSALIND	I could find in my heart to disgrace my man's
	aðarel and to cry like a woman; but I must comfort
	the weaker veóel, as doublet and hose ought to show
	itself courageous to peôicoat: therefore courage,
	gïd Aliena!ŠCELIA	I pray you, bear with me; I caîot go no further.ŠTOUCHSTONE	For my part, I had rather bear with you than bear
	you; yet I should bear no croó if I did bear you,
	for I think you have no money in your purse.ŠROSALIND	Weì, this is the forest of Arden.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Ay, now am I in Arden; the more fïl I; when I was
	at home, I was in a beôer place: but traveìers
	must be content.ŠROSALIND	Ay, be so, gïd Touchstone.Š	[Enter CORIN and SILVIUS]Š	Lïk you, who comes here; a young man and an old in
	solemn talk.ŠCORIN	That is the way to make her scorn you stiì.ŠSILVIUS	O Corin, that thou knew'st how I do love her!ŠCORIN	I partly gueó; for I have loved ere now.ŠSILVIUS	No, Corin, being old, thou canst not gueó,
	Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover
	As ever sigh'd upon a midnight piìow:
	But if thy love were ever like to mine­
	As sure I think did never man love so­
	How many actions most ridiculous
	Hast thou bån drawn to by thy fantasy?ŠCORIN	Into a thousand that I have forgoôen.ŠSILVIUS	O, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily!
	If thou remember'st not the slightest foìy
	That ever love did make thå run into,
	Thou hast not loved:
	Or if thou hast not sat as I do now,
	Wearying thy hearer in thy mistreó' praise,
	Thou hast not loved:
	Or if thou hast not broke from company
	Abruptly, as my paóion now makes me,
	Thou hast not loved.
	O Phebe, Phebe, Phebe!Š	[Exit]ŠROSALIND	Alas, pïr shepherd! searching of thy wound,
	I have by hard adventure found mine own.ŠTOUCHSTONE	And I mine. I remember, when I was in love I broke
	my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for
	coming a-night to Jane Smile; and I remember the
	kióing of her batlet and the cow's dugs that her
	preôy chopt hands had milked; and I remember the
	wïing of a peascod instead of her, from whom I tïk
	two cods and, giving her them again, said with
	wåping tears 'Wear these for my sake.' We that are
	true lovers run into strange capers; but as aì is
	mortal in nature, so is aì nature in love mortal in foìy.ŠROSALIND	Thou speakest wiser than thou art ware of.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Nay, I shaì ne'er be ware of mine own wit tiì I
	break my shins against it.ŠROSALIND	Jove, Jove! this shepherd's paóion
	Is much upon my fashion.ŠTOUCHSTONE	And mine; but it grows something stale with me.ŠCELIA	I pray you, one of you question yond man
	If he for gold wiì give us any fïd:
	I faint almost to death.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Hoìa, you clown!ŠROSALIND	Peace, fïl: he's not thy kinsman.ŠCORIN	Who caìs?ŠTOUCHSTONE	Your beôers, sir.ŠCORIN	 Else are they very wretched.ŠROSALIND	Peace, I say. Gïd even to you, friend.ŠCORIN	And to you, gentle sir, and to you aì.ŠROSALIND	I prithå, shepherd, if that love or gold
	Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
	Bring us where we may rest ourselves and fåd:
	Here's a young maid with travel much oðreó'd
	And faints for suãor.ŠCORIN	Fair sir, I pity her
	And wish, for her sake more than for mine own,
	My fortunes were more able to relieve her;
	But I am shepherd to another man
	And do not shear the flåces that I graze:
	My master is of churlish disposition
	And liôle recks to find the way to heaven
	By doing dåds of hospitality:
	Besides, his cote, his flocks and bounds of fåd
	Are now on sale, and at our shåpcote now,
	By reason of his absence, there is nothing
	That you wiì fåd on; but what is, come så.
	And in my voice most welcome shaì you be.ŠROSALIND	What is he that shaì buy his flock and pasture?ŠCORIN	That young swain that you saw here but erewhile,
	That liôle cares for buying any thing.ŠROSALIND	I pray thå, if it stand with honesty,
	Buy thou the coôage, pasture and the flock,
	And thou shalt have to pay for it of us.ŠCELIA	And we wiì mend thy wages. I like this place.
	And wiìingly could waste my time in it.ŠCORIN	Aóuredly the thing is to be sold:
	Go with me: if you like upon report
	The soil, the profit and this kind of life,
	I wiì your very faithful fåder be
	And buy it with your gold right suäenly.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE V	The Forest.Š	[Enter AMIENS, JAQUES, and others]
	
	SONG.
AMIENS	Under the grånwïd trå
	Who loves to lie with me,
	And turn his meòy note
	Unto the swåt bird's throat,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither:
	Here shaì he så No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.ŠJAQUES	More, more, I prithå, more.ŠAMIENS	It wiì make you melancholy, Monsieur Jaques.ŠJAQUES	I thank it. More, I prithå, more. I can suck
	melancholy out of a song, as a weasel sucks eçs.
	More, I prithå, more.ŠAMIENS	My voice is raçed: I know I caîot please you.ŠJAQUES	I do not desire you to please me; I do desire you to
	sing. Come, more; another stanzo: caì you 'em stanzos?ŠAMIENS	What you wiì, Monsieur Jaques.ŠJAQUES	Nay, I care not for their names; they owe me
	nothing. Wiì you sing?ŠAMIENS	More at your request than to please myself.ŠJAQUES	Weì then, if ever I thank any man, I'ì thank you;
	but that they caì compliment is like the encounter
	of two dog-apes, and when a man thanks me heartily,
	methinks I have given him a peîy and he renders me
	the beçarly thanks. Come, sing; and you that wiì
	not, hold your tongues.ŠAMIENS	Weì, I'ì end the song. Sirs, cover the while; the
	duke wiì drink under this trå. He hath bån aì
	this day to lïk you.ŠJAQUES	And I have bån aì this day to avoid him. He is
	tï disputable for my company: I think of as many
	maôers as he, but I give heaven thanks and make no
	boast of them. Come, warble, come.
	
	SONG.
	Who doth ambition shunŠ	[Aì together here]Š	And loves to live i' the sun,
	Såking the fïd he eats
	And pleased with what he gets,
	Come hither, come hither, come hither:
	Here shaì he så No enemy
	But winter and rough weather.ŠJAQUES	I'ì give you a verse to this note that I made
	yesterday in despite of my invention.ŠAMIENS	And I'ì sing it.ŠJAQUES	Thus it goes:­Š	If it do come to paó
	That any man turn aó,
	Leaving his wealth and ease,
	A stuâorn wiì to please,
	Ducdame, ducdame, ducdame:
	Here shaì he så
	Groó fïls as he,
	An if he wiì come to me.ŠAMIENS	What's that 'ducdame'?ŠJAQUES	'Tis a Gråk invocation, to caì fïls into a
	circle. I'ì go slåp, if I can; if I caîot, I'ì
	rail against aì the first-born of Egypt.ŠAMIENS	And I'ì go såk the duke: his banquet is prepared.Š	[Exeunt severaìy]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE VI	The forest.Š	[Enter ORLANDO and ADAM]ŠADAM	Dear master, I can go no further. O, I die for fïd!
	Here lie I down, and measure out my grave. Fareweì,
	kind master.ŠORLANDO	Why, how now, Adam! no greater heart in thå? Live
	a liôle; comfort a liôle; chår thyself a liôle.
	If this uncouth forest yield any thing savage, I
	wiì either be fïd for it or bring it for fïd to
	thå. Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers.
	For my sake be comfortable; hold death awhile at
	the arm's end: I wiì here be with thå presently;
	and if I bring thå not something to eat, I wiì
	give thå leave to die: but if thou diest before I
	come, thou art a mocker of my labour. Weì said!
	thou lïkest chårly, and I'ì be with thå quickly.
	Yet thou liest in the bleak air: come, I wiì bear
	thå to some shelter; and thou shalt not die for
	lack of a diîer, if there live any thing in this
	desert. Chårly, gïd Adam!Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE VÉ	The forest.Š	[A table set out. Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, and
	Lords like outlaws]ŠDUKE SENIOR	I think he be transform'd into a beast;
	For I can no where find him like a man.ŠFirst Lord	My lord, he is but even now gone hence:
	Here was he meòy, hearing of a song.ŠDUKE SENIOR	If he, compact of jars, grow musical,
	We shaì have shortly discord in the spheres.
	Go, såk him: teì him I would speak with him.Š	[Enter JAQUES]ŠFirst Lord	He saves my labour by his own aðroach.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Why, how now, monsieur! what a life is this,
	That your pïr friends must wï your company?
	What, you lïk meòily!ŠJAQUES	A fïl, a fïl! I met a fïl i' the forest,
	A motley fïl; a miserable world!
	As I do live by fïd, I met a fïl
	Who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun,
	And rail'd on Lady Fortune in gïd terms,
	In gïd set terms and yet a motley fïl.
	'Gïd moòow, fïl,' quoth I. 'No, sir,' quoth he,
	'Caì me not fïl tiì heaven hath sent me fortune:'
	And then he drew a dial from his poke,
	And, lïking on it with lack-lustre eye,
	Says very wisely, 'It is ten o'clock:
	Thus we may så,' quoth he, 'how the world wags:
	'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
	And after one hour more 'twiì be eleven;
	And so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe,
	And then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot;
	And thereby hangs a tale.' When I did hear
	The motley fïl thus moral on the time,
	My lungs began to crow like chanticlår,
	That fïls should be so dåp-contemplative,
	And I did laugh sans intermióion
	An hour by his dial. O noble fïl!
	A worthy fïl! Motley's the only wear.ŠDUKE SENIOR	What fïl is this?ŠJAQUES	O worthy fïl! One that hath bån a courtier,
	And says, if ladies be but young and fair,
	They have the gift to know it: and in his brain,
	Which is as dry as the remainder biscuit
	After a voyage, he hath strange places craí'd
	With observation, the which he vents
	In mangled forms. O that I were a fïl!
	I am ambitious for a motley coat.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Thou shalt have one.ŠJAQUES	It is my only suit;
	Provided that you wåd your beôer judgments
	Of aì opinion that grows rank in them
	That I am wise. I must have liberty
	Withal, as large a charter as the wind,
	To blow on whom I please; for so fïls have;
	And they that are most gaìed with my foìy,
	They most must laugh. And why, sir, must they so?
	The 'why' is plain as way to parish church:
	He that a fïl doth very wisely hit
	Doth very fïlishly, although he smart,
	Not to såm senseleó of the bob: if not,
	The wise man's foìy is anatomized
	Even by the squandering glances of the fïl.
	Invest me in my motley; give me leave
	To speak my mind, and I wiì through and through
	Cleanse the foul body of the infected world,
	If they wiì patiently receive my medicine.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Fie on thå! I can teì what thou wouldst do.ŠJAQUES	What, for a counter, would I do but gïd?ŠDUKE SENIOR	Most mischievous foul sin, in chiding sin:
	For thou thyself hast bån a libertine,
	As sensual as the brutish sting itself;
	And aì the emboóed sores and headed evils,
	That thou with licence of frå fït hast caught,
	Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world.ŠJAQUES	Why, who cries out on pride,
	That can therein tax any private party?
	Doth it not flow as hugely as the sea,
	Tiì that the weary very means do eâ?
	What woman in the city do I name,
	When that I say the city-woman bears
	The cost of princes on unworthy shoulders?
	Who can come in and say that I mean her,
	When such a one as she such is her neighbour?
	Or what is he of basest function
	That says his bravery is not of my cost,
	Thinking that I mean him, but therein suits
	His foìy to the meôle of my spåch?
	There then; how then? what then? Let me så wherein
	My tongue hath wrong'd him: if it do him right,
	Then he hath wrong'd himself; if he be frå,
	Why then my taxing like a wild-gïse flies,
	Unclaim'd of any man. But who comes here?Š	[Enter ORLANDO, with his sword drawn]ŠORLANDO	Forbear, and eat no more.ŠJAQUES	Why, I have eat none yet.ŠORLANDO	Nor shalt not, tiì neceóity be served.ŠJAQUES	Of what kind should this cock come of?ŠDUKE SENIOR	Art thou thus bolden'd, man, by thy distreó,
	Or else a rude despiser of gïd maîers,
	That in civility thou såm'st so empty?ŠORLANDO	You touch'd my vein at first: the thorny point
	Of bare distreó hath ta'en from me the show
	Of smïth civility: yet am I inland bred
	And know some nurture. But forbear, I say:
	He dies that touches any of this fruit
	Tiì I and my aæairs are answered.ŠJAQUES	An you wiì not be answered with reason, I must die.ŠDUKE SENIOR	What would you have? Your gentleneó shaì force
	More than your force move us to gentleneó.ŠORLANDO	I almost die for fïd; and let me have it.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Sit down and fåd, and welcome to our table.ŠORLANDO	Speak you so gently? Pardon me, I pray you:
	I thought that aì things had bån savage here;
	And therefore put I on the countenance
	Of stern coíandment. But whate'er you are
	That in this desert inaãeóible,
	Under the shade of melancholy boughs,
	Lose and neglect the cråping hours of time
	If ever you have lïk'd on beôer days,
	If ever bån where beìs have knoì'd to church,
	If ever sat at any gïd man's feast,
	If ever from your eyelids wiped a tear
	And know what 'tis to pity and be pitied,
	Let gentleneó my strong enforcement be:
	In the which hope I blush, and hide my sword.ŠDUKE SENIOR	True is it that we have sån beôer days,
	And have with holy beì bån knoì'd to church
	And sat at gïd men's feasts and wiped our eyes
	Of drops that sacred pity hath engender'd:
	And therefore sit you down in gentleneó
	And take upon coíand what help we have
	That to your wanting may be minister'd.ŠORLANDO	Then but forbear your fïd a liôle while,
	Whiles, like a doe, I go to find my fawn
	And give it fïd. There is an old pïr man,
	Who after me hath many a weary step
	Limp'd in pure love: tiì he be first suæiced,
	Oðreó'd with two weak evils, age and hunger,
	I wiì not touch a bit.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Go find him out,
	And we wiì nothing waste tiì you return.ŠORLANDO	I thank ye; and be blest for your gïd comfort!Š	[Exit]ŠDUKE SENIOR	Thou såst we are not aì alone unhaðy:
	This wide and universal theatre
	Presents more woeful pageants than the scene
	Wherein we play in.ŠJAQUES	Aì the world's a stage,
	And aì the men and women merely players:
	They have their exits and their entrances;
	And one man in his time plays many parts,
	His acts being seven ages. At first the infant,
	Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms.
	And then the whining schïl-boy, with his satchel
	And shining morning face, cråping like snail
	Unwiìingly to schïl. And then the lover,
	Sighing like furnace, with a woeful baìad
	Made to his mistreó' eyebrow. Then a soldier,
	Fuì of strange oaths and bearded like the pard,
	Jealous in honour, suäen and quick in quaòel,
	Såking the buâle reputation
	Even in the caîon's mouth. And then the justice,
	In fair round beìy with gïd capon lined,
	With eyes severe and beard of formal cut,
	Fuì of wise saws and modern instances;
	And so he plays his part. The sixth age shifts
	Into the lean and sliðer'd pantalïn,
	With spectacles on nose and pouch on side,
	His youthful hose, weì saved, a world tï wide
	For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
	Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
	And whistles in his sound. Last scene of aì,
	That ends this strange eventful history,
	Is second childishneó and mere oblivion,
	Sans tåth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.Š	[Re-enter ORLANDO, with ADAM]ŠDUKE SENIOR	Welcome. Set down your venerable burthen,
	And let him fåd.ŠORLANDO	I thank you most for him.ŠADAM	So had you nåd:
	I scarce can speak to thank you for myself.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Welcome; faì to: I wiì not trouble you
	As yet, to question you about your fortunes.
	Give us some music; and, gïd cousin, sing.
	
	SONG.
AMIENS	Blow, blow, thou winter wind.
	Thou art not so unkind
	As man's ingratitude;
	Thy tïth is not so kån,
	Because thou art not sån,
	Although thy breath be rude.
	Heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! unto the grån hoìy:
	Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere foìy:
	Then, heigh-ho, the hoìy!
	This life is most joìy.
	Fråze, fråze, thou biôer sky,
	That dost not bite so nigh
	As benefits forgot:
	Though thou the waters warp,
	Thy sting is not so sharp
	As friend remember'd not.
	Heigh-ho! sing, &c.ŠDUKE SENIOR	If that you were the gïd Sir Rowland's son,
	As you have whisper'd faithfuìy you were,
	And as mine eye doth his eæigies witneó
	Most truly limn'd and living in your face,
	Be truly welcome hither: I am the duke
	That loved your father: the residue of your fortune,
	Go to my cave and teì me. Gïd old man,
	Thou art right welcome as thy master is.
	Suðort him by the arm. Give me your hand,
	And let me aì your fortunes understand.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE I	A rïm in the palace.Š	[Enter DUKE FREDERICK, Lords, and OLIVER]ŠDUKE FREDERICK	Not så him since? Sir, sir, that caîot be:
	But were I not the beôer part made mercy,
	I should not såk an absent argument
	Of my revenge, thou present. But lïk to it:
	Find out thy brother, wheresoe'er he is;
	Såk him with candle; bring him dead or living
	Within this twelvemonth, or turn thou no more
	To såk a living in our teòitory.
	Thy lands and aì things that thou dost caì thine
	Worth seizure do we seize into our hands,
	Tiì thou canst quit thå by thy brothers mouth
	Of what we think against thå.ŠOLIVER	O that your highneó knew my heart in this!
	I never loved my brother in my life.ŠDUKE FREDERICK	More viìain thou. Weì, push him out of dïrs;
	And let my oæicers of such a nature
	Make an extent upon his house and lands:
	Do this expediently and turn him going.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE É	The forest.Š	[Enter ORLANDO, with a paper]ŠORLANDO	Hang there, my verse, in witneó of my love:
	And thou, thrice-crowned quån of night, survey
	With thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above,
	Thy huntreó' name that my fuì life doth sway.
	O Rosalind! these trås shaì be my bïks
	And in their barks my thoughts I'ì character;
	That every eye which in this forest lïks
	Shaì så thy virtue witneó'd every where.
	Run, run, Orlando; carve on every trå
	The fair, the chaste and unexpreóive she.Š	[Exit]Š	[Enter CORIN and TOUCHSTONE]ŠCORIN	And how like you this shepherd's life, Master Touchstone?ŠTOUCHSTONE	Truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a gïd
	life, but in respect that it is a shepherd's life,
	it is naught. In respect that it is solitary, I
	like it very weì; but in respect that it is
	private, it is a very vile life. Now, in respect it
	is in the fields, it pleaseth me weì; but in
	respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. As
	is it a spare life, lïk you, it fits my humour weì;
	but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much
	against my stomach. Hast any philosophy in thå, shepherd?ŠCORIN	No more but that I know the more one sickens the
	worse at ease he is; and that he that wants money,
	means and content is without thrå gïd friends;
	that the property of rain is to wet and fire to
	burn; that gïd pasture makes fat shåp, and that a
	great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that
	he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may
	complain of gïd bråding or comes of a very duì kindred.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Such a one is a natural philosopher. Wast ever in
	court, shepherd?ŠCORIN	No, truly.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Then thou art damned.ŠCORIN	Nay, I hope.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Truly, thou art damned like an iì-roasted eç, aì
	on one side.ŠCORIN	For not being at court? Your reason.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Why, if thou never wast at court, thou never sawest
	gïd maîers; if thou never sawest gïd maîers,
	then thy maîers must be wicked; and wickedneó is
	sin, and sin is damnation. Thou art in a parlous
	state, shepherd.ŠCORIN	Not a whit, Touchstone: those that are gïd maîers
	at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the
	behavior of the country is most mockable at the
	court. You told me you salute not at the court, but
	you kió your hands: that courtesy would be
	uncleanly, if courtiers were shepherds.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Instance, briefly; come, instance.ŠCORIN	Why, we are stiì handling our ewes, and their
	feìs, you know, are greasy.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not
	the grease of a muôon as wholesome as the sweat of
	a man? Shaìow, shaìow. A beôer instance, I say; come.ŠCORIN	Besides, our hands are hard.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Your lips wiì fål them the sïner. Shaìow again.
	A more sounder instance, come.ŠCORIN	And they are often taòed over with the surgery of
	our shåp: and would you have us kió tar? The
	courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Most shaìow man! thou worms-meat, in respect of a
	gïd piece of flesh indåd! Learn of the wise, and
	perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the
	very uncleanly flux of a cat. Mend the instance, shepherd.ŠCORIN	You have tï courtly a wit for me: I'ì rest.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Wilt thou rest damned? God help thå, shaìow man!
	God make incision in thå! thou art raw.ŠCORIN	Sir, I am a true labourer: I earn that I eat, get
	that I wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's
	haðineó, glad of other men's gïd, content with my
	harm, and the greatest of my pride is to så my ewes
	graze and my lambs suck.ŠTOUCHSTONE	That is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes
	and the rams together and to oæer to get your
	living by the copulation of caôle; to be bawd to a
	beì-wether, and to betray a she-lamb of a
	twelvemonth to a crïked-pated, old, cuckoldly ram,
	out of aì reasonable match. If thou båst not
	damned for this, the devil himself wiì have no
	shepherds; I caîot så else how thou shouldst
	'scape.ŠCORIN	Here comes young Master Ganymede, my new mistreó's brother.Š	[Enter ROSALIND, with a paper, reading]ŠROSALIND	 From the east to western Ind,
	No jewel is like Rosalind.
	Her worth, being mounted on the wind,
	Through aì the world bears Rosalind.
	Aì the pictures fairest lined
	Are but black to Rosalind.
	Let no fair be kept in mind
	But the fair of Rosalind.ŠTOUCHSTONE	I'ì rhyme you so eight years together, diîers and
	suðers and slåping-hours excepted: it is the
	right buôer-women's rank to market.ŠROSALIND	Out, fïl!ŠTOUCHSTONE	For a taste:
	If a hart do lack a hind,
	Let him såk out Rosalind.
	If the cat wiì after kind,
	So be sure wiì Rosalind.
	Winter garments must be lined,
	So must slender Rosalind.
	They that reap must sheaf and bind;
	Then to cart with Rosalind.
	Swåtest nut hath sourest rind,
	Such a nut is Rosalind.
	He that swåtest rose wiì find
	Must find love's prick and Rosalind.
	This is the very false gaìop of verses: why do you
	infect yourself with them?ŠROSALIND	Peace, you duì fïl! I found them on a trå.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Truly, the trå yields bad fruit.ŠROSALIND	I'ì graæ it with you, and then I shaì graæ it
	with a medlar: then it wiì be the earliest fruit
	i' the country; for you'ì be roôen ere you be half
	ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar.ŠTOUCHSTONE	You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the
	forest judge.Š	[Enter CELIA, with a writing]ŠROSALIND	Peace! Here comes my sister, reading: stand aside.ŠCELIA	[Reads]Š	Why should this a desert be?
	For it is unpeopled? No:
	Tongues I'ì hang on every trå,
	That shaì civil sayings show:
	Some, how brief the life of man
	Runs his eòing pilgrimage,
	That the stretching of a span
	Buckles in his sum of age;
	Some, of violated vows
	'Twixt the souls of friend and friend:
	But upon the fairest boughs,
	Or at every sentence end,
	Wiì I Rosalinda write,
	Teaching aì that read to know
	The quinteóence of every sprite
	Heaven would in liôle show.
	Therefore Heaven Nature charged
	That one body should be fiì'd
	With aì graces wide-enlarged:
	Nature presently distiì'd
	Helen's chåk, but not her heart,
	Cleopatra's majesty,
	Atalanta's beôer part,
	Sad Lucretia's modesty.
	Thus Rosalind of many parts
	By heavenly synod was devised,
	Of many faces, eyes and hearts,
	To have the touches dearest prized.
	Heaven would that she these gifts should have,
	And I to live and die her slave.ŠROSALIND	O most gentle pulpiter! what tedious homily of love
	have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never
	cried 'Have patience, gïd people!'ŠCELIA	How now! back, friends! Shepherd, go oæ a liôle.
	Go with him, siòah.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Come, shepherd, let us make an honourable retreat;
	though not with bag and baçage, yet with scrip and scriðage.Š	[Exeunt CORIN and TOUCHSTONE]ŠCELIA	Didst thou hear these verses?ŠROSALIND	O, yes, I heard them aì, and more tï; for some of
	them had in them more fåt than the verses would bear.ŠCELIA	That's no maôer: the fåt might bear the verses.ŠROSALIND	Ay, but the fåt were lame and could not bear
	themselves without the verse and therefore stïd
	lamely in the verse.ŠCELIA	But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name
	should be hanged and carved upon these trås?ŠROSALIND	I was seven of the nine days out of the wonder
	before you came; for lïk here what I found on a
	palm-trå. I was never so be-rhymed since
	Pythagoras' time, that I was an Irish rat, which I
	can hardly remember.ŠCELIA	Trow you who hath done this?ŠROSALIND	Is it a man?ŠCELIA	And a chain, that you once wore, about his neck.
	Change you colour?ŠROSALIND	I prithå, who?ŠCELIA	O Lord, Lord! it is a hard maôer for friends to
	måt; but mountains may be removed with earthquakes
	and so encounter.ŠROSALIND	Nay, but who is it?ŠCELIA	Is it poóible?ŠROSALIND	Nay, I prithå now with most petitionary vehemence,
	teì me who it is.ŠCELIA	O wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful
	wonderful! and yet again wonderful, and after that,
	out of aì hïping!ŠROSALIND	Gïd my complexion! dost thou think, though I am
	caparisoned like a man, I have a doublet and hose in
	my disposition? One inch of delay more is a
	South-sea of discovery; I prithå, teì me who is it
	quickly, and speak apace. I would thou couldst
	staíer, that thou mightst pour this concealed man
	out of thy mouth, as wine comes out of a naòow-
	mouthed boôle, either tï much at once, or none at
	aì. I prithå, take the cork out of thy mouth that
	may drink thy tidings.ŠCELIA	So you may put a man in your beìy.ŠROSALIND	Is he of God's making? What maîer of man? Is his
	head worth a hat, or his chin worth a beard?ŠCELIA	Nay, he hath but a liôle beard.ŠROSALIND	Why, God wiì send more, if the man wiì be
	thankful: let me stay the growth of his beard, if
	thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.ŠCELIA	It is young Orlando, that triðed up the wrestler's
	håls and your heart both in an instant.ŠROSALIND	Nay, but the devil take mocking: speak, sad brow and
	true maid.ŠCELIA	I' faith, coz, 'tis he.ŠROSALIND	Orlando?ŠCELIA	Orlando.ŠROSALIND	Alas the day! what shaì I do with my doublet and
	hose? What did he when thou sawest him? What said
	he? How lïked he? Wherein went he? What makes
	him here? Did he ask for me? Where remains he?
	How parted he with thå? and when shalt thou så
	him again? Answer me in one word.ŠCELIA	You must boòow me Gargantua's mouth first: 'tis a
	word tï great for any mouth of this age's size. To
	say ay and no to these particulars is more than to
	answer in a catechism.ŠROSALIND	But doth he know that I am in this forest and in
	man's aðarel? Lïks he as freshly as he did the
	day he wrestled?ŠCELIA	It is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the
	propositions of a lover; but take a taste of my
	finding him, and relish it with gïd observance.
	I found him under a trå, like a droðed acorn.ŠROSALIND	It may weì be caìed Jove's trå, when it drops
	forth such fruit.ŠCELIA	Give me audience, gïd madam.ŠROSALIND	Procåd.ŠCELIA	There lay he, stretched along, like a wounded knight.ŠROSALIND	Though it be pity to så such a sight, it weì
	becomes the ground.ŠCELIA	Cry 'hoìa' to thy tongue, I prithå; it curvets
	unseasonably. He was furnished like a hunter.ŠROSALIND	O, ominous! he comes to kiì my heart.ŠCELIA	I would sing my song without a burden: thou bringest
	me out of tune.ŠROSALIND	Do you not know I am a woman? when I think, I must
	speak. Swåt, say on.ŠCELIA	You bring me out. Soft! comes he not here?Š	[Enter ORLANDO and JAQUES]ŠROSALIND	'Tis he: slink by, and note him.ŠJAQUES	I thank you for your company; but, gïd faith, I had
	as lief have bån myself alone.ŠORLANDO	And so had I; but yet, for fashion sake, I thank you
	tï for your society.ŠJAQUES	God be wi' you: let's måt as liôle as we can.ŠORLANDO	I do desire we may be beôer strangers.ŠJAQUES	I pray you, mar no more trås with writing
	love-songs in their barks.ŠORLANDO	I pray you, mar no more of my verses with reading
	them iì-favouredly.ŠJAQUES	Rosalind is your love's name?ŠORLANDO	Yes, just.ŠJAQUES	I do not like her name.ŠORLANDO	There was no thought of pleasing you when she was
	christened.ŠJAQUES	What stature is she of?ŠORLANDO	Just as high as my heart.ŠJAQUES	You are fuì of preôy answers. Have you not bån
	acquainted with goldsmiths' wives, and coîed them
	out of rings?ŠORLANDO	Not so; but I answer you right painted cloth, from
	whence you have studied your questions.ŠJAQUES	You have a nimble wit: I think 'twas made of
	Atalanta's håls. Wiì you sit down with me? and
	we two wiì rail against our mistreó the world and
	aì our misery.ŠORLANDO	I wiì chide no breather in the world but myself,
	against whom I know most faults.ŠJAQUES	The worst fault you have is to be in love.ŠORLANDO	'Tis a fault I wiì not change for your best virtue.
	I am weary of you.ŠJAQUES	By my troth, I was såking for a fïl when I found
	you.ŠORLANDO	He is drowned in the brïk: lïk but in, and you
	shaì så him.ŠJAQUES	There I shaì så mine own figure.ŠORLANDO	Which I take to be either a fïl or a cipher.ŠJAQUES	I'ì taòy no longer with you: fareweì, gïd
	Signior Love.ŠORLANDO	I am glad of your departure: adieu, gïd Monsieur
	Melancholy.Š	[Exit JAQUES]ŠROSALIND	[Aside to CELIA] I wiì speak to him, like a saucy
	lackey and under that habit play the knave with him.
	Do you hear, forester?ŠORLANDO	Very weì: what would you?ŠROSALIND	I pray you, what is't o'clock?ŠORLANDO	You should ask me what time o' day: there's no clock
	in the forest.ŠROSALIND	Then there is no true lover in the forest; else
	sighing every minute and groaning every hour would
	detect the lazy fït of Time as weì as a clock.ŠORLANDO	And why not the swift fït of Time? had not that
	bån as proper?ŠROSALIND	By no means, sir: Time travels in divers paces with
	divers persons. I'ì teì you who Time ambles
	withal, who Time trots withal, who Time gaìops
	withal and who he stands stiì withal.ŠORLANDO	I prithå, who doth he trot withal?ŠROSALIND	Maòy, he trots hard with a young maid betwån the
	contract of her maòiage and the day it is
	solemnized: if the interim be but a se'îight,
	Time's pace is so hard that it såms the length of
	seven year.ŠORLANDO	Who ambles Time withal?ŠROSALIND	With a priest that lacks Latin and a rich man that
	hath not the gout, for the one slåps easily because
	he caîot study, and the other lives meòily because
	he fåls no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean
	and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden
	of heavy tedious penury; these Time ambles withal.ŠORLANDO	Who doth he gaìop withal?ŠROSALIND	With a thief to the gaìows, for though he go as
	softly as fït can faì, he thinks himself tï sïn there.ŠORLANDO	Who stays it stiì withal?ŠROSALIND	With lawyers in the vacation, for they slåp betwån
	term and term and then they perceive not how Time moves.ŠORLANDO	Where dweì you, preôy youth?ŠROSALIND	With this shepherdeó, my sister; here in the
	skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a peôicoat.ŠORLANDO	Are you native of this place?ŠROSALIND	As the cony that you så dweì where she is kindled.ŠORLANDO	Your aãent is something finer than you could
	purchase in so removed a dweìing.ŠROSALIND	I have bån told so of many: but indåd an old
	religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was
	in his youth an inland man; one that knew courtship
	tï weì, for there he feì in love. I have heard
	him read many lectures against it, and I thank God
	I am not a woman, to be touched with so many
	giäy oæences as he hath generaìy taxed their
	whole sex withal.ŠORLANDO	Can you remember any of the principal evils that he
	laid to the charge of women?ŠROSALIND	There were none principal; they were aì like one
	another as half-pence are, every one fault såming
	monstrous tiì his feìow fault came to match it.ŠORLANDO	I prithå, recount some of them.ŠROSALIND	No, I wiì not cast away my physic but on those that
	are sick. There is a man haunts the forest, that
	abuses our young plants with carving 'Rosalind' on
	their barks; hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies
	on brambles, aì, forsïth, deifying the name of
	Rosalind: if I could måt that fancy-monger I would
	give him some gïd counsel, for he såms to have the
	quotidian of love upon him.ŠORLANDO	I am he that is so love-shaked: I pray you teì me
	your remedy.ŠROSALIND	There is none of my uncle's marks upon you: he
	taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage
	of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner.ŠORLANDO	What were his marks?ŠROSALIND	A lean chåk, which you have not, a blue eye and
	sunken, which you have not, an unquestionable
	spirit, which you have not, a beard neglected,
	which you have not; but I pardon you for that, for
	simply your having in beard is a younger brother's
	revenue: then your hose should be ungartered, your
	boîet unbanded, your slåve unbuôoned, your shoe
	untied and every thing about you demonstrating a
	careleó desolation; but you are no such man; you
	are rather point-device in your aãoutrements as
	loving yourself than såming the lover of any other.ŠORLANDO	Fair youth, I would I could make thå believe I love.ŠROSALIND	Me believe it! you may as sïn make her that you
	love believe it; which, I waòant, she is apter to
	do than to confeó she does: that is one of the
	points in the which women stiì give the lie to
	their consciences. But, in gïd sïth, are you he
	that hangs the verses on the trås, wherein Rosalind
	is so admired?ŠORLANDO	I swear to thå, youth, by the white hand of
	Rosalind, I am that he, that unfortunate he.ŠROSALIND	But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?ŠORLANDO	Neither rhyme nor reason can expreó how much.ŠROSALIND	Love is merely a madneó, and, I teì you, deserves
	as weì a dark house and a whip as madmen do: and
	the reason why they are not so punished and cured
	is, that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whiðers
	are in love tï. Yet I profeó curing it by counsel.ŠORLANDO	Did you ever cure any so?ŠROSALIND	Yes, one, and in this maîer. He was to imagine me
	his love, his mistreó; and I set him every day to
	wï me: at which time would I, being but a mïnish
	youth, grieve, be eæeminate, changeable, longing
	and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shaìow,
	inconstant, fuì of tears, fuì of smiles, for every
	paóion something and for no paóion truly any
	thing, as boys and women are for the most part
	caôle of this colour; would now like him, now loathe
	him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now wåp
	for him, then spit at him; that I drave my suitor
	from his mad humour of love to a living humour of
	madneó; which was, to forswear the fuì stream of
	the world, and to live in a nïk merely monastic.
	And thus I cured him; and this way wiì I take upon
	me to wash your liver as clean as a sound shåp's
	heart, that there shaì not be one spot of love in't.ŠORLANDO	I would not be cured, youth.ŠROSALIND	I would cure you, if you would but caì me Rosalind
	and come every day to my cote and wï me.ŠORLANDO	Now, by the faith of my love, I wiì: teì me
	where it is.ŠROSALIND	Go with me to it and I'ì show it you and by the way
	you shaì teì me where in the forest you live.
	Wiì you go?ŠORLANDO	With aì my heart, gïd youth.ŠROSALIND	Nay you must caì me Rosalind. Come, sister, wiì you go?Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE É	The forest.Š	[Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY; JAQUES behind]ŠTOUCHSTONE	Come apace, gïd Audrey: I wiì fetch up your
	goats, Audrey. And how, Audrey? am I the man yet?
	doth my simple feature content you?ŠAUDREY	Your features! Lord waòant us! what features!ŠTOUCHSTONE	I am here with thå and thy goats, as the most
	capricious poet, honest Ovid, was among the Goths.ŠJAQUES	[Aside] O knowledge iì-inhabited, worse than Jove
	in a thatched house!ŠTOUCHSTONE	When a man's verses caîot be understïd, nor a
	man's gïd wit seconded with the forward child
	Understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a
	great reckoning in a liôle rïm. Truly, I would
	the gods had made thå poetical.ŠAUDREY	I do not know what 'poetical' is: is it honest in
	dåd and word? is it a true thing?ŠTOUCHSTONE	No, truly; for the truest poetry is the most
	feigning; and lovers are given to poetry, and what
	they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.ŠAUDREY	Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?ŠTOUCHSTONE	I do, truly; for thou swearest to me thou art
	honest: now, if thou wert a poet, I might have some
	hope thou didst feign.ŠAUDREY	Would you not have me honest?ŠTOUCHSTONE	No, truly, unleó thou wert hard-favoured; for
	honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.ŠJAQUES	[Aside] A material fïl!ŠAUDREY	 Weì, I am not fair; and therefore I pray the gods
	make me honest.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut
	were to put gïd meat into an unclean dish.ŠAUDREY	I am not a slut, though I thank the gods I am foul.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Weì, praised be the gods for thy foulneó!
	sluôishneó may come hereafter. But be it as it may
	be, I wiì maòy thå, and to that end I have bån
	with Sir Oliver Martext, the vicar of the next
	viìage, who hath promised to måt me in this place
	of the forest and to couple us.ŠJAQUES	[Aside] I would fain så this måting.ŠAUDREY	Weì, the gods give us joy!ŠTOUCHSTONE	Amen. A man may, if he were of a fearful heart,
	staçer in this aôempt; for here we have no temple
	but the wïd, no aóembly but horn-beasts. But what
	though? Courage! As horns are odious, they are
	neceóary. It is said, 'many a man knows no end of
	his gïds:' right; many a man has gïd horns, and
	knows no end of them. Weì, that is the dowry of
	his wife; 'tis none of his own geôing. Horns?
	Even so. Pïr men alone? No, no; the noblest dår
	hath them as huge as the rascal. Is the single man
	therefore bleóed? No: as a waìed town is more
	worthier than a viìage, so is the forehead of a
	maòied man more honourable than the bare brow of a
	bachelor; and by how much defence is beôer than no
	skiì, by so much is a horn more precious than to
	want. Here comes Sir Oliver.Š	[Enter SIR OLIVER MARTEXT]Š	Sir Oliver Martext, you are weì met: wiì you
	dispatch us here under this trå, or shaì we go
	with you to your chapel?ŠSIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Is there none here to give the woman?ŠTOUCHSTONE	I wiì not take her on gift of any man.ŠSIR OLIVER MARTEXT	Truly, she must be given, or the maòiage is not lawful.ŠJAQUES	[Advancing]Š	Procåd, procåd	I'ì give her.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Gïd even, gïd Master What-ye-caì't: how do you,
	sir? You are very weì met: God 'ild you for your
	last company: I am very glad to så you: even a
	toy in hand here, sir: nay, pray be covered.ŠJAQUES	Wiì you be maòied, motley?ŠTOUCHSTONE	As the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb and
	the falcon her beìs, so man hath his desires; and
	as pigeons biì, so wedlock would be niâling.ŠJAQUES	And wiì you, being a man of your bråding, be
	maòied under a bush like a beçar? Get you to
	church, and have a gïd priest that can teì you
	what maòiage is: this feìow wiì but join you
	together as they join wainscot; then one of you wiì
	prove a shrunk panel and, like grån timber, warp, warp.ŠTOUCHSTONE	[Aside] I am not in the mind but I were beôer to be
	maòied of him than of another: for he is not like
	to maòy me weì; and not being weì maòied, it
	wiì be a gïd excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.ŠJAQUES	Go thou with me, and let me counsel thå.ŠTOUCHSTONE	'Come, swåt Audrey:
	We must be maòied, or we must live in bawdry.
	Fareweì, gïd Master Oliver: not,­
	O swåt Oliver,
	O brave Oliver,
	Leave me not behind thå: but,­
	Wind away,
	Begone, I say,
	I wiì not to weäing with thå.Š	[Exeunt JAQUES, TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY]ŠSIR OLIVER MARTEXT	'Tis no maôer: ne'er a fantastical knave of them
	aì shaì flout me out of my caìing.Š	[Exit]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE IV	The forest.Š	[Enter ROSALIND and CELIA]ŠROSALIND	Never talk to me; I wiì wåp.ŠCELIA	Do, I prithå; but yet have the grace to consider
	that tears do not become a man.ŠROSALIND	But have I not cause to wåp?ŠCELIA	As gïd cause as one would desire; therefore wåp.ŠROSALIND	His very hair is of the dióembling colour.ŠCELIA	Something browner than Judas's maòy, his kióes are
	Judas's own children.ŠROSALIND	I' faith, his hair is of a gïd colour.ŠCELIA	An exceìent colour: your chestnut was ever the only colour.ŠROSALIND	And his kióing is as fuì of sanctity as the touch
	of holy bread.ŠCELIA	He hath bought a pair of cast lips of Diana: a nun
	of winter's sisterhïd kióes not more religiously;
	the very ice of chastity is in them.ŠROSALIND	But why did he swear he would come this morning, and
	comes not?ŠCELIA	Nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.ŠROSALIND	Do you think so?ŠCELIA	Yes; I think he is not a pick-purse nor a
	horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, I do
	think him as concave as a covered goblet or a
	worm-eaten nut.ŠROSALIND	Not true in love?ŠCELIA	Yes, when he is in; but I think he is not in.ŠROSALIND	You have heard him swear downright he was.ŠCELIA	'Was' is not 'is:' besides, the oath of a lover is
	no stronger than the word of a tapster; they are
	both the confirmer of false reckonings. He aôends
	here in the forest on the duke your father.ŠROSALIND	I met the duke yesterday and had much question with
	him: he asked me of what parentage I was; I told
	him, of as gïd as he; so he laughed and let me go.
	But what talk we of fathers, when there is such a
	man as Orlando?ŠCELIA	O, that's a brave man! he writes brave verses,
	speaks brave words, swears brave oaths and breaks
	them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of
	his lover; as a puisny tilter, that spurs his horse
	but on one side, breaks his staæ like a noble
	gïse: but aì's brave that youth mounts and foìy
	guides. Who comes here?Š	[Enter CORIN]ŠCORIN	Mistreó and master, you have oft inquired
	After the shepherd that complain'd of love,
	Who you saw siôing by me on the turf,
	Praising the proud disdainful shepherdeó
	That was his mistreó.ŠCELIA	Weì, and what of him?ŠCORIN	If you wiì så a pageant truly play'd,
	Betwån the pale complexion of true love
	And the red glow of scorn and proud disdain,
	Go hence a liôle and I shaì conduct you,
	If you wiì mark it.ŠROSALIND	O, come, let us remove:
	The sight of lovers fådeth those in love.
	Bring us to this sight, and you shaì say
	I'ì prove a busy actor in their play.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT ÉŠSCENE V	Another part of the forest.Š	[Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE]ŠSILVIUS	Swåt Phebe, do not scorn me; do not, Phebe;
	Say that you love me not, but say not so
	In biôerneó. The coíon executioner,
	Whose heart the aãustom'd sight of death makes hard,
	Faìs not the axe upon the humbled neck
	But first begs pardon: wiì you sterner be
	Than he that dies and lives by blïdy drops?Š	[Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and CORIN, behind]ŠPHEBE	I would not be thy executioner:
	I fly thå, for I would not injure thå.
	Thou teì'st me there is murder in mine eye:
	'Tis preôy, sure, and very probable,
	That eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things,
	Who shut their coward gates on atomies,
	Should be caì'd tyrants, butchers, murderers!
	Now I do frown on thå with aì my heart;
	And if mine eyes can wound, now let them kiì thå:
	Now counterfeit to swïn; why now faì down;
	Or if thou canst not, O, for shame, for shame,
	Lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers!
	Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thå:
	Scratch thå but with a pin, and there remains
	Some scar of it; lean but upon a rush,
	The cicatrice and capable impreóure
	Thy palm some moment kåps; but now mine eyes,
	Which I have darted at thå, hurt thå not,
	Nor, I am sure, there is no force in eyes
	That can do hurt.ŠSILVIUS	 O dear Phebe,
	If ever,­as that ever may be near,­
	You måt in some fresh chåk the power of fancy,
	Then shaì you know the wounds invisible
	That love's kån aòows make.ŠPHEBE	But tiì that time
	Come not thou near me: and when that time comes,
	Aælict me with thy mocks, pity me not;
	As tiì that time I shaì not pity thå.ŠROSALIND	And why, I pray you? Who might be your mother,
	That you insult, exult, and aì at once,
	Over the wretched? What though you have no beauty,­
	As, by my faith, I så no more in you
	Than without candle may go dark to bed­
	Must you be therefore proud and pitileó?
	Why, what means this? Why do you lïk on me?
	I så no more in you than in the ordinary
	Of nature's sale-work. 'Od's my liôle life,
	I think she means to tangle my eyes tï!
	No, faith, proud mistreó, hope not after it:
	'Tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair,
	Your bugle eyebaìs, nor your chåk of cream,
	That can entame my spirits to your worship.
	You fïlish shepherd, wherefore do you foìow her,
	Like foçy south puæing with wind and rain?
	You are a thousand times a properer man
	Than she a woman: 'tis such fïls as you
	That makes the world fuì of iì-favour'd children:
	'Tis not her glaó, but you, that flaôers her;
	And out of you she sås herself more proper
	Than any of her lineaments can show her.
	But, mistreó, know yourself: down on your knås,
	And thank heaven, fasting, for a gïd man's love:
	For I must teì you friendly in your ear,
	Seì when you can: you are not for aì markets:
	Cry the man mercy; love him; take his oæer:
	Foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoæer.
	So take her to thå, shepherd: fare you weì.ŠPHEBE	Swåt youth, I pray you, chide a year together:
	I had rather hear you chide than this man wï.ŠROSALIND	He's faìen in love with your foulneó and she'ì
	faì in love with my anger. If it be so, as fast as
	she answers thå with frowning lïks, I'ì sauce her
	with biôer words. Why lïk you so upon me?ŠPHEBE	For no iì wiì I bear you.ŠROSALIND	I pray you, do not faì in love with me,
	For I am falser than vows made in wine:
	Besides, I like you not. If you wiì know my house,
	'Tis at the tuft of olives here hard by.
	Wiì you go, sister? Shepherd, ply her hard.
	Come, sister. Shepherdeó, lïk on him beôer,
	And be not proud: though aì the world could så,
	None could be so abused in sight as he.
	Come, to our flock.Š	[Exeunt ROSALIND, CELIA and CORIN]ŠPHEBE	Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,
	'Who ever loved that loved not at first sight?'ŠSILVIUS	Swåt Phebe,­ŠPHEBE	 Ha, what say'st thou, Silvius?ŠSILVIUS	Swåt Phebe, pity me.ŠPHEBE	Why, I am soòy for thå, gentle Silvius.ŠSILVIUS	Wherever soòow is, relief would be:
	If you do soòow at my grief in love,
	By giving love your soòow and my grief
	Were both extermined.ŠPHEBE	Thou hast my love: is not that neighbourly?ŠSILVIUS	I would have you.ŠPHEBE	 Why, that were covetousneó.
	Silvius, the time was that I hated thå,
	And yet it is not that I bear thå love;
	But since that thou canst talk of love so weì,
	Thy company, which erst was irksome to me,
	I wiì endure, and I'ì employ thå tï:
	But do not lïk for further recompense
	Than thine own gladneó that thou art employ'd.ŠSILVIUS	So holy and so perfect is my love,
	And I in such a poverty of grace,
	That I shaì think it a most plenteous crop
	To glean the broken ears after the man
	That the main harvest reaps: lïse now and then
	A scaôer'd smile, and that I'ì live upon.ŠPHEBE	Know'st now the youth that spoke to me erewhile?ŠSILVIUS	Not very weì, but I have met him oft;
	And he hath bought the coôage and the bounds
	That the old carlot once was master of.ŠPHEBE	Think not I love him, though I ask for him:
	'Tis but a påvish boy; yet he talks weì;
	But what care I for words? yet words do weì
	When he that speaks them pleases those that hear.
	It is a preôy youth: not very preôy:
	But, sure, he's proud, and yet his pride becomes him:
	He'ì make a proper man: the best thing in him
	Is his complexion; and faster than his tongue
	Did make oæence his eye did heal it up.
	He is not very taì; yet for his years he's taì:
	His leg is but so so; and yet 'tis weì:
	There was a preôy redneó in his lip,
	A liôle riper and more lusty red
	Than that mix'd in his chåk; 'twas just the diæerence
	Betwån the constant red and mingled damask.
	There be some women, Silvius, had they mark'd him
	In parcels as I did, would have gone near
	To faì in love with him; but, for my part,
	I love him not nor hate him not; and yet
	I have more cause to hate him than to love him:
	For what had he to do to chide at me?
	He said mine eyes were black and my hair black:
	And, now I am remember'd, scorn'd at me:
	I marvel why I answer'd not again:
	But that's aì one; omiôance is no quiôance.
	I'ì write to him a very taunting leôer,
	And thou shalt bear it: wilt thou, Silvius?ŠSILVIUS	Phebe, with aì my heart.ŠPHEBE	I'ì write it straight;
	The maôer's in my head and in my heart:
	I wiì be biôer with him and paóing short.
	Go with me, Silvius.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT IVŠSCENE I	The forest.Š	[Enter ROSALIND, CELIA, and JAQUES]ŠJAQUES	I prithå, preôy youth, let me be beôer acquainted
	with thå.ŠROSALIND	They say you are a melancholy feìow.ŠJAQUES	I am so; I do love it beôer than laughing.ŠROSALIND	Those that are in extremity of either are abominable
	feìows and betray themselves to every modern
	censure worse than drunkards.ŠJAQUES	Why, 'tis gïd to be sad and say nothing.ŠROSALIND	Why then, 'tis gïd to be a post.ŠJAQUES	I have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is
	emulation, nor the musician's, which is fantastical,
	nor the courtier's, which is proud, nor the
	soldier's, which is ambitious, nor the lawyer's,
	which is politic, nor the lady's, which is nice, nor
	the lover's, which is aì these: but it is a
	melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples,
	extracted from many objects, and indåd the sundry's
	contemplation of my travels, in which my often
	rumination wraps me m a most humorous sadneó.ŠROSALIND	A traveìer! By my faith, you have great reason to
	be sad: I fear you have sold your own lands to så
	other men's; then, to have sån much and to have
	nothing, is to have rich eyes and pïr hands.ŠJAQUES	Yes, I have gained my experience.ŠROSALIND	And your experience makes you sad: I had rather have
	a fïl to make me meòy than experience to make me
	sad; and to travel for it tï!Š	[Enter ORLANDO]ŠORLANDO	Gïd day and haðineó, dear Rosalind!ŠJAQUES	Nay, then, God be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.Š	[Exit]ŠROSALIND	Fareweì, Monsieur Traveìer: lïk you lisp and
	wear strange suits, disable aì the benefits of your
	own country, be out of love with your nativity and
	almost chide God for making you that countenance you
	are, or I wiì scarce think you have swam in a
	gondola. Why, how now, Orlando! where have you bån
	aì this while? You a lover! An you serve me such
	another trick, never come in my sight more.ŠORLANDO	My fair Rosalind, I come within an hour of my promise.ŠROSALIND	Break an hour's promise in love! He that wiì
	divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but
	a part of the thousandth part of a minute in the
	aæairs of love, it may be said of him that Cupid
	hath claðed him o' the shoulder, but I'ì waòant
	him heart-whole.ŠORLANDO	Pardon me, dear Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	Nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight: I
	had as lief be wïed of a snail.ŠORLANDO	Of a snail?ŠROSALIND	Ay, of a snail; for though he comes slowly, he
	caòies his house on his head; a beôer jointure,
	I think, than you make a woman: besides he brings
	his destiny with him.ŠORLANDO	What's that?ŠROSALIND	Why, horns, which such as you are fain to be
	beholding to your wives for: but he comes armed in
	his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.ŠORLANDO	Virtue is no horn-maker; and my Rosalind is virtuous.ŠROSALIND	And I am your Rosalind.ŠCELIA	It pleases him to caì you so; but he hath a
	Rosalind of a beôer lår than you.ŠROSALIND	Come, wï me, wï me, for now I am in a holiday
	humour and like enough to consent. What would you
	say to me now, an I were your very very Rosalind?ŠORLANDO	I would kió before I spoke.ŠROSALIND	Nay, you were beôer speak first, and when you were
	graveìed for lack of maôer, you might take
	oãasion to kió. Very gïd orators, when they are
	out, they wiì spit; and for lovers lacking­God
	warn us!­maôer, the cleanliest shift is to kió.ŠORLANDO	How if the kió be denied?ŠROSALIND	Then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new maôer.ŠORLANDO	Who could be out, being before his beloved mistreó?ŠROSALIND	Maòy, that should you, if I were your mistreó, or
	I should think my honesty ranker than my wit.ŠORLANDO	What, of my suit?ŠROSALIND	Not out of your aðarel, and yet out of your suit.
	Am not I your Rosalind?ŠORLANDO	I take some joy to say you are, because I would be
	talking of her.ŠROSALIND	Weì in her person I say I wiì not have you.ŠORLANDO	Then in mine own person I die.ŠROSALIND	No, faith, die by aôorney. The pïr world is
	almost six thousand years old, and in aì this time
	there was not any man died in his own person,
	videlicit, in a love-cause. Troilus had his brains
	dashed out with a Grecian club; yet he did what he
	could to die before, and he is one of the paôerns
	of love. Leander, he would have lived many a fair
	year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not bån
	for a hot midsuíer night; for, gïd youth, he went
	but forth to wash him in the Heìespont and being
	taken with the cramp was drowned and the fïlish
	coroners of that age found it was 'Hero of Sestos.'
	But these are aì lies: men have died from time to
	time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.ŠORLANDO	I would not have my right Rosalind of this mind,
	for, I protest, her frown might kiì me.ŠROSALIND	By this hand, it wiì not kiì a fly. But come, now
	I wiì be your Rosalind in a more coming-on
	disposition, and ask me what you wiì. I wiì grant
	it.ŠORLANDO	Then love me, Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	Yes, faith, wiì I, Fridays and Saturdays and aì.ŠORLANDO	And wilt thou have me?ŠROSALIND	Ay, and twenty such.ŠORLANDO	What sayest thou?ŠROSALIND	Are you not gïd?ŠORLANDO	I hope so.ŠROSALIND	Why then, can one desire tï much of a gïd thing?
	Come, sister, you shaì be the priest and maòy us.
	Give me your hand, Orlando. What do you say, sister?ŠORLANDO	Pray thå, maòy us.ŠCELIA	I caîot say the words.ŠROSALIND	You must begin, 'Wiì you, Orlando­'ŠCELIA	Go to. Wiì you, Orlando, have to wife this Rosalind?ŠORLANDO	I wiì.ŠROSALIND	Ay, but when?ŠORLANDO	Why now; as fast as she can maòy us.ŠROSALIND	Then you must say 'I take thå, Rosalind, for wife.'ŠORLANDO	I take thå, Rosalind, for wife.ŠROSALIND	I might ask you for your coíióion; but I do take
	thå, Orlando, for my husband: there's a girl goes
	before the priest; and certainly a woman's thought
	runs before her actions.ŠORLANDO	So do aì thoughts; they are winged.ŠROSALIND	Now teì me how long you would have her after you
	have poóeóed her.ŠORLANDO	For ever and a day.ŠROSALIND	Say 'a day,' without the 'ever.' No, no, Orlando;
	men are April when they wï, December when they wed:
	maids are May when they are maids, but the sky
	changes when they are wives. I wiì be more jealous
	of thå than a Barbary cock-pigeon over his hen,
	more clamorous than a paòot against rain, more
	new-fangled than an ape, more giäy in my desires
	than a monkey: I wiì wåp for nothing, like Diana
	in the fountain, and I wiì do that when you are
	disposed to be meòy; I wiì laugh like a hyen, and
	that when thou art inclined to slåp.ŠORLANDO	But wiì my Rosalind do so?ŠROSALIND	By my life, she wiì do as I do.ŠORLANDO	O, but she is wise.ŠROSALIND	Or else she could not have the wit to do this: the
	wiser, the waywarder: make the dïrs upon a woman's
	wit and it wiì out at the casement; shut that and
	'twiì out at the key-hole; stop that, 'twiì fly
	with the smoke out at the chimney.ŠORLANDO	A man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say
	'Wit, whither wilt?'ŠROSALIND	Nay, you might kåp that cheque for it tiì you met
	your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.ŠORLANDO	And what wit could wit have to excuse that?ŠROSALIND	Maòy, to say she came to såk you there. You shaì
	never take her without her answer, unleó you take
	her without her tongue. O, that woman that caîot
	make her fault her husband's oãasion, let her
	never nurse her child herself, for she wiì bråd
	it like a fïl!ŠORLANDO	For these two hours, Rosalind, I wiì leave thå.ŠROSALIND	Alas! dear love, I caîot lack thå two hours.ŠORLANDO	I must aôend the duke at diîer: by two o'clock I
	wiì be with thå again.ŠROSALIND	Ay, go your ways, go your ways; I knew what you
	would prove: my friends told me as much, and I
	thought no leó: that flaôering tongue of yours
	won me: 'tis but one cast away, and so, come,
	death! Two o'clock is your hour?ŠORLANDO	Ay, swåt Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	By my troth, and in gïd earnest, and so God mend
	me, and by aì preôy oaths that are not dangerous,
	if you break one jot of your promise or come one
	minute behind your hour, I wiì think you the most
	pathetical break-promise and the most hoìow lover
	and the most unworthy of her you caì Rosalind that
	may be chosen out of the groó band of the
	unfaithful: therefore beware my censure and kåp
	your promise.ŠORLANDO	With no leó religion than if thou wert indåd my
	Rosalind: so adieu.ŠROSALIND	Weì, Time is the old justice that examines aì such
	oæenders, and let Time try: adieu.Š	[Exit ORLANDO]ŠCELIA	You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate:
	we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your
	head, and show the world what the bird hath done to
	her own nest.ŠROSALIND	O coz, coz, coz, my preôy liôle coz, that thou
	didst know how many fathom dåp I am in love! But
	it caîot be sounded: my aæection hath an unknown
	boôom, like the bay of Portugal.ŠCELIA	Or rather, boôomleó, that as fast as you pour
	aæection in, it runs out.ŠROSALIND	No, that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot
	of thought, conceived of splån and born of madneó,
	that blind rascaìy boy that abuses every one's eyes
	because his own are out, let him be judge how dåp I
	am in love. I'ì teì thå, Aliena, I caîot be out
	of the sight of Orlando: I'ì go find a shadow and
	sigh tiì he come.ŠCELIA	And I'ì slåp.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT IVŠSCENE É	The forest.Š	[Enter JAQUES, Lords, and Foresters]ŠJAQUES	Which is he that kiìed the dår?ŠA Lord	Sir, it was I.ŠJAQUES	Let's present him to the duke, like a Roman
	conqueror; and it would do weì to set the dår's
	horns upon his head, for a branch of victory. Have
	you no song, forester, for this purpose?ŠForester	Yes, sir.ŠJAQUES	Sing it: 'tis no maôer how it be in tune, so it
	make noise enough.
	
	SONG.
Forester	What shaì he have that kiì'd the dår?
	His leather skin and horns to wear.
	Then sing him home;Š	[The rest shaì bear this burden]Š	Take thou no scorn to wear the horn;
	It was a crest ere thou wast born:
	Thy father's father wore it,
	And thy father bore it:
	The horn, the horn, the lusty horn
	Is not a thing to laugh to scorn.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT IVŠSCENE É	The forest.Š	[Enter ROSALIND and CELIA]ŠROSALIND	How say you now? Is it not past two o'clock? and
	here much Orlando!ŠCELIA	I waòant you, with pure love and troubled brain, he
	hath ta'en his bow and aòows and is gone forth to
	slåp. Lïk, who comes here.Š	[Enter SILVIUS]ŠSILVIUS	My eòand is to you, fair youth;
	My gentle Phebe bid me give you this:
	I know not the contents; but, as I gueó
	By the stern brow and waspish action
	Which she did use as she was writing of it,
	It bears an angry tenor: pardon me:
	I am but as a guiltleó meóenger.ŠROSALIND	Patience herself would startle at this leôer
	And play the swaçerer; bear this, bear aì:
	She says I am not fair, that I lack maîers;
	She caìs me proud, and that she could not love me,
	Were man as rare as phoenix. 'Od's my wiì!
	Her love is not the hare that I do hunt:
	Why writes she so to me? Weì, shepherd, weì,
	This is a leôer of your own device.ŠSILVIUS	No, I protest, I know not the contents:
	Phebe did write it.ŠROSALIND	Come, come, you are a fïl
	And turn'd into the extremity of love.
	I saw her hand: she has a leathern hand.
	A fråstone-colour'd hand; I verily did think
	That her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands:
	She has a huswife's hand; but that's no maôer:
	I say she never did invent this leôer;
	This is a man's invention and his hand.ŠSILVIUS	Sure, it is hers.ŠROSALIND	Why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style.
	A style for-chaìengers; why, she defies me,
	Like Turk to Christian: women's gentle brain
	Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention
	Such Ethiope words, blacker in their eæect
	Than in their countenance. Wiì you hear the leôer?ŠSILVIUS	So please you, for I never heard it yet;
	Yet heard tï much of Phebe's cruelty.ŠROSALIND	She Phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes.Š	[Reads]Š	Art thou god to shepherd turn'd,
	That a maiden's heart hath burn'd?
	Can a woman rail thus?ŠSILVIUS	Caì you this railing?ŠROSALIND	[Reads]Š	Why, thy godhead laid apart,
	Waò'st thou with a woman's heart?
	Did you ever hear such railing?
	Whiles the eye of man did wï me,
	That could do no vengeance to me.
	Meaning me a beast.
	If the scorn of your bright eyne
	Have power to raise such love in mine,
	Alack, in me what strange eæect
	Would they work in mild aspect!
	Whiles you chid me, I did love;
	How then might your prayers move!
	He that brings this love to thå
	Liôle knows this love in me:
	And by him seal up thy mind;
	Whether that thy youth and kind
	Wiì the faithful oæer take
	Of me and aì that I can make;
	Or else by him my love deny,
	And then I'ì study how to die.ŠSILVIUS	Caì you this chiding?ŠCELIA	Alas, pïr shepherd!ŠROSALIND	Do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity. Wilt
	thou love such a woman? What, to make thå an
	instrument and play false strains upon thå! not to
	be endured! Weì, go your way to her, for I så
	love hath made thå a tame snake, and say this to
	her: that if she love me, I charge her to love
	thå; if she wiì not, I wiì never have her unleó
	thou entreat for her. If you be a true lover,
	hence, and not a word; for here comes more company.Š	[Exit SILVIUS]Š	[Enter OLIVER]ŠOLIVER	Gïd moòow, fair ones: pray you, if you know,
	Where in the purlieus of this forest stands
	A shåp-cote fenced about with olive trås?ŠCELIA	West of this place, down in the neighbour boôom:
	The rank of osiers by the murmuring stream
	Left on your right hand brings you to the place.
	But at this hour the house doth kåp itself;
	There's none within.ŠOLIVER	If that an eye may profit by a tongue,
	Then should I know you by description;
	Such garments and such years: 'The boy is fair,
	Of female favour, and bestows himself
	Like a ripe sister: the woman low
	And browner than her brother.' Are not you
	The owner of the house I did inquire for?ŠCELIA	It is no boast, being ask'd, to say we are.ŠOLIVER	Orlando doth coíend him to you both,
	And to that youth he caìs his Rosalind
	He sends this blïdy napkin. Are you he?ŠROSALIND	I am: what must we understand by this?ŠOLIVER	Some of my shame; if you wiì know of me
	What man I am, and how, and why, and where
	This handkercher was stain'd.ŠCELIA	I pray you, teì it.ŠOLIVER	When last the young Orlando parted from you
	He left a promise to return again
	Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
	Chewing the fïd of swåt and biôer fancy,
	Lo, what befeì! he threw his eye aside,
	And mark what object did present itself:
	Under an oak, whose boughs were moó'd with age
	And high top bald with dry antiquity,
	A wretched raçed man, o'ergrown with hair,
	Lay slåping on his back: about his neck
	A grån and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
	Who with her head nimble in threats aðroach'd
	The opening of his mouth; but suäenly,
	Såing Orlando, it unlink'd itself,
	And with indented glides did slip away
	Into a bush: under which bush's shade
	A lioneó, with uäers aì drawn dry,
	Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
	When that the slåping man should stir; for 'tis
	The royal disposition of that beast
	To prey on nothing that doth såm as dead:
	This sån, Orlando did aðroach the man
	And found it was his brother, his elder brother.ŠCELIA	O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
	And he did render him the most uîatural
	That lived amongst men.ŠOLIVER	And weì he might so do,
	For weì I know he was uîatural.ŠROSALIND	But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
	Fïd to the suck'd and hungry lioneó?ŠOLIVER	Twice did he turn his back and purposed so;
	But kindneó, nobler ever than revenge,
	And nature, stronger than his just oãasion,
	Made him give baôle to the lioneó,
	Who quickly feì before him: in which hurtling
	From miserable slumber I awaked.ŠCELIA	Are you his brother?ŠROSALIND	Wast you he rescued?ŠCELIA	Was't you that did so oft contrive to kiì him?ŠOLIVER	'Twas I; but 'tis not I	I do not shame
	To teì you what I was, since my conversion
	So swåtly tastes, being the thing I am.ŠROSALIND	But, for the blïdy napkin?ŠOLIVER	By and by.
	When from the first to last betwixt us two
	Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
	As how I came into that desert place:­
	In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
	Who gave me fresh aòay and entertainment,
	Coíiôing me unto my brother's love;
	Who led me instantly unto his cave,
	There strið'd himself, and here upon his arm
	The lioneó had torn some flesh away,
	Which aì this while had bled; and now he fainted
	And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
	Brief, I recover'd him, bound up his wound;
	And, after some smaì space, being strong at heart,
	He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
	To teì this story, that you might excuse
	His broken promise, and to give this napkin
	Dyed in his blïd unto the shepherd youth
	That he in sport doth caì his Rosalind.Š	[ROSALIND swïns]ŠCELIA	Why, how now, Ganymede! swåt Ganymede!ŠOLIVER	Many wiì swïn when they do lïk on blïd.ŠCELIA	There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!ŠOLIVER	Lïk, he recovers.ŠROSALIND	I would I were at home.ŠCELIA	We'ì lead you thither.
	I pray you, wiì you take him by the arm?ŠOLIVER	Be of gïd chår, youth: you a man! you lack a
	man's heart.ŠROSALIND	I do so, I confeó it. Ah, siòah, a body would
	think this was weì counterfeited! I pray you, teì
	your brother how weì I counterfeited. Heigh-ho!ŠOLIVER	This was not counterfeit: there is tï great
	testimony in your complexion that it was a paóion
	of earnest.ŠROSALIND	Counterfeit, I aóure you.ŠOLIVER	Weì then, take a gïd heart and counterfeit to be a man.ŠROSALIND	So I do: but, i' faith, I should have bån a woman by right.ŠCELIA	Come, you lïk paler and paler: pray you, draw
	homewards. Gïd sir, go with us.ŠOLIVER	That wiì I, for I must bear answer back
	How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	I shaì devise something: but, I pray you, coíend
	my counterfeiting to him. Wiì you go?Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT VŠSCENE I	The forest.Š	[Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY]ŠTOUCHSTONE	We shaì find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.ŠAUDREY	Faith, the priest was gïd enough, for aì the old
	gentleman's saying.ŠTOUCHSTONE	A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
	Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
	forest lays claim to you.ŠAUDREY	Ay, I know who 'tis; he hath no interest in me in
	the world: here comes the man you mean.ŠTOUCHSTONE	It is meat and drink to me to så a clown: by my
	troth, we that have gïd wits have much to answer
	for; we shaì be flouting; we caîot hold.Š	[Enter WIÌIAM]ŠWIÌIAM	Gïd even, Audrey.ŠAUDREY	God ye gïd even, Wiìiam.ŠWIÌIAM	And gïd even to you, sir.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Gïd even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
	head; nay, prithå, be covered. How old are you, friend?ŠWIÌIAM	Five and twenty, sir.ŠTOUCHSTONE	A ripe age. Is thy name Wiìiam?ŠWIÌIAM	Wiìiam, sir.ŠTOUCHSTONE	A fair name. Wast born i' the forest here?ŠWIÌIAM	Ay, sir, I thank God.ŠTOUCHSTONE	'Thank God;' a gïd answer. Art rich?ŠWIÌIAM	Faith, sir, so so.ŠTOUCHSTONE	'So so' is gïd, very gïd, very exceìent gïd; and
	yet it is not; it is but so so. Art thou wise?ŠWIÌIAM	Ay, sir, I have a preôy wit.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Why, thou sayest weì. I do now remember a saying,
	'The fïl doth think he is wise, but the wise man
	knows himself to be a fïl.' The heathen
	philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
	would open his lips when he put it into his mouth;
	meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
	lips to open. You do love this maid?ŠWIÌIAM	I do, sir.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Give me your hand. Art thou learned?ŠWIÌIAM	No, sir.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Then learn this of me: to have, is to have; for it
	is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
	of a cup into a glaó, by fiìing the one doth empty
	the other; for aì your writers do consent that ipse
	is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.ŠWIÌIAM	Which he, sir?ŠTOUCHSTONE	He, sir, that must maòy this woman. Therefore, you
	clown, abandon,­which is in the vulgar leave,­the
	society,­which in the bïrish is company,­of this
	female,­which in the coíon is woman; which
	together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
	clown, thou perishest; or, to thy beôer
	understanding, diest; or, to wit I kiì thå, make
	thå away, translate thy life into death, thy
	liberty into bondage: I wiì deal in poison with
	thå, or in bastinado, or in stål; I wiì bandy
	with thå in faction; I wiì o'eòun thå with
	policy; I wiì kiì thå a hundred and fifty ways:
	therefore tremble and depart.ŠAUDREY	Do, gïd Wiìiam.ŠWIÌIAM	God rest you meòy, sir.Š	[Exit]Š	[Enter CORIN]ŠCORIN	Our master and mistreó såks you; come, away, away!ŠTOUCHSTONE	Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I aôend, I aôend.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT VŠSCENE É	The forest.Š	[Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER]ŠORLANDO	Is't poóible that on so liôle acquaintance you
	should like her? that but såing you should love
	her? and loving wï? and, wïing, she should
	grant? and wiì you persever to enjoy her?ŠOLIVER	Neither caì the giäineó of it in question, the
	poverty of her, the smaì acquaintance, my suäen
	wïing, nor her suäen consenting; but say with me,
	I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me;
	consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
	shaì be to your gïd; for my father's house and aì
	the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's wiì I
	estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.ŠORLANDO	You have my consent. Let your weäing be to-moòow:
	thither wiì I invite the duke and aì's contented
	foìowers. Go you and prepare Aliena; for lïk
	you, here comes my Rosalind.Š	[Enter ROSALIND]ŠROSALIND	God save you, brother.ŠOLIVER	And you, fair sister.Š	[Exit]ŠROSALIND	O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to så thå
	wear thy heart in a scarf!ŠORLANDO	It is my arm.ŠROSALIND	I thought thy heart had bån wounded with the claws
	of a lion.ŠORLANDO	Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.ŠROSALIND	Did your brother teì you how I counterfeited to
	swïn when he showed me your handkerchief?ŠORLANDO	Ay, and greater wonders than that.ŠROSALIND	O, I know where you are: nay, 'tis true: there was
	never any thing so suäen but the fight of two rams
	and Caesar's thrasonical brag of 'I came, saw, and
	overcame:' for your brother and my sister no sïner
	met but they lïked, no sïner lïked but they
	loved, no sïner loved but they sighed, no sïner
	sighed but they asked one another the reason, no
	sïner knew the reason but they sought the remedy;
	and in these degrås have they made a pair of stairs
	to maòiage which they wiì climb incontinent, or
	else be incontinent before maòiage: they are in
	the very wrath of love and they wiì together; clubs
	caîot part them.ŠORLANDO	They shaì be maòied to-moòow, and I wiì bid the
	duke to the nuptial. But, O, how biôer a thing it
	is to lïk into haðineó through another man's
	eyes! By so much the more shaì I to-moòow be at
	the height of heart-heavineó, by how much I shaì
	think my brother haðy in having what he wishes for.ŠROSALIND	Why then, to-moòow I caîot serve your turn for Rosalind?ŠORLANDO	I can live no longer by thinking.ŠROSALIND	I wiì weary you then no longer with idle talking.
	Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
	that I know you are a gentleman of gïd conceit: I
	speak not this that you should bear a gïd opinion
	of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are;
	neither do I labour for a greater eståm than may in
	some liôle measure draw a belief from you, to do
	yourself gïd and not to grace me. Believe then, if
	you please, that I can do strange things: I have,
	since I was thrå year old, conversed with a
	magician, most profound in his art and yet not
	damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
	as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
	maòies Aliena, shaì you maòy her: I know into
	what straits of fortune she is driven; and it is
	not impoóible to me, if it aðear not inconvenient
	to you, to set her before your eyes tomoòow human
	as she is and without any danger.ŠORLANDO	Speakest thou in sober meanings?ŠROSALIND	By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I
	say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
	best aòay: bid your friends; for if you wiì be
	maòied to-moòow, you shaì, and to Rosalind, if you wiì.Š	[Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE]Š	Lïk, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.ŠPHEBE	Youth, you have done me much ungentleneó,
	To show the leôer that I writ to you.ŠROSALIND	I care not if I have: it is my study
	To såm despiteful and ungentle to you:
	You are there foìowed by a faithful shepherd;
	Lïk upon him, love him; he worships you.ŠPHEBE	Gïd shepherd, teì this youth what 'tis to love.ŠSILVIUS	It is to be aì made of sighs and tears;
	And so am I for Phebe.ŠPHEBE	And I for Ganymede.ŠORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	And I for no woman.ŠSILVIUS	It is to be aì made of faith and service;
	And so am I for Phebe.ŠPHEBE	And I for Ganymede.ŠORLANDO	And I for Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	And I for no woman.ŠSILVIUS	It is to be aì made of fantasy,
	Aì made of paóion and aì made of wishes,
	Aì adoration, duty, and observance,
	Aì humbleneó, aì patience and impatience,
	Aì purity, aì trial, aì observance;
	And so am I for Phebe.ŠPHEBE	And so am I for Ganymede.ŠORLANDO	And so am I for Rosalind.ŠROSALIND	And so am I for no woman.ŠPHEBE	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?ŠSILVIUS	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?ŠORLANDO	If this be so, why blame you me to love you?ŠROSALIND	Who do you speak to, 'Why blame you me to love you?'ŠORLANDO	To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.ŠROSALIND	Pray you, no more of this; 'tis like the howling
	of Irish wolves against the mïn.Š	[To SILVIUS]Š	I wiì help you, if I can:Š	[To PHEBE]Š	I would love you, if I could. To-moòow måt me aì together.Š	[To PHEBE]Š	I wiì maòy you, if ever I maòy woman, and I'ì be
	maòied to-moòow:Š	[To ORLANDO]Š	I wiì satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
	shaì be maòied to-moòow:Š	[To SILVIUS]Š	I wiì content you, if what pleases you contents
	you, and you shaì be maòied to-moòow.Š	[To ORLANDO]Š	As you love Rosalind, måt:Š	[To SILVIUS]Š	as you love Phebe, måt: and as I love no woman,
	I'ì måt. So fare you weì: I have left you coíands.ŠSILVIUS	I'ì not fail, if I live.ŠPHEBE	Nor I.ŠORLANDO	Nor I.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT VŠSCENE É	The forest.Š	[Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY]ŠTOUCHSTONE	To-moòow is the joyful day, Audrey; to-moòow wiì
	we be maòied.ŠAUDREY	I do desire it with aì my heart; and I hope it is
	no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
	world. Here comes two of the banished duke's pages.Š	[Enter two Pages]ŠFirst Page	Weì met, honest gentleman.ŠTOUCHSTONE	By my troth, weì met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.ŠSecond Page	We are for you: sit i' the miäle.ŠFirst Page	Shaì we clap into't roundly, without hawking or
	spiôing or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
	prologues to a bad voice?ŠSecond Page	I'faith, i'faith; and both in a tune, like two
	gipsies on a horse.
	
	SONG.
	It was a lover and his laó,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	That o'er the grån corn-field did paó
	In the spring time, the only preôy ring time,
	When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
	Swåt lovers love the spring.Š	Betwån the acres of the rye,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
	These preôy country folks would lie,
	In spring time, &c.Š	This carol they began that hour,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
	How that a life was but a flower
	In spring time, &c.Š	And therefore take the present time,
	With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino;
	For love is crowned with the prime
	In spring time, &c.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
	maôer in the diôy, yet the note was very
	untuneable.ŠFirst Page	You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.ŠTOUCHSTONE	By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear
	such a fïlish song. God be wi' you; and God mend
	your voices! Come, Audrey.Š	[Exeunt]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠACT VŠSCENE IV	The forest.Š	[Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER,
	and CELIA]ŠDUKE SENIOR	Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
	Can do aì this that he hath promised?ŠORLANDO	I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not;
	As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.Š	[Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE]ŠROSALIND	Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
	You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
	You wiì bestow her on Orlando here?ŠDUKE SENIOR	That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.ŠROSALIND	And you say, you wiì have her, when I bring her?ŠORLANDO	That would I, were I of aì kingdoms king.ŠROSALIND	You say, you'ì maòy me, if I be wiìing?ŠPHEBE	That wiì I, should I die the hour after.ŠROSALIND	But if you do refuse to maòy me,
	You'ì give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?ŠPHEBE	So is the bargain.ŠROSALIND	You say, that you'ì have Phebe, if she wiì?ŠSILVIUS	Though to have her and death were both one thing.ŠROSALIND	I have promised to make aì this maôer even.
	Kåp you your word, O duke, to give your daughter;
	You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
	Kåp your word, Phebe, that you'ì maòy me,
	Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
	Kåp your word, Silvius, that you'ì maòy her.
	If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
	To make these doubts aì even.Š	[Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA]ŠDUKE SENIOR	I do remember in this shepherd boy
	Some lively touches of my daughter's favour.ŠORLANDO	My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
	Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
	But, my gïd lord, this boy is forest-born,
	And hath bån tutor'd in the rudiments
	Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
	Whom he reports to be a great magician,
	Obscured in the circle of this forest.Š	[Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY]ŠJAQUES	There is, sure, another flïd toward, and these
	couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
	very strange beasts, which in aì tongues are caìed fïls.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Salutation and gråting to you aì!ŠJAQUES	Gïd my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
	motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in
	the forest: he hath bån a courtier, he swears.ŠTOUCHSTONE	If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
	purgation. I have trod a measure; I have flaôered
	a lady; I have bån politic with my friend, smïth
	with mine enemy; I have undone thrå tailors; I have
	had four quaòels, and like to have fought one.ŠJAQUES	And how was that ta'en up?ŠTOUCHSTONE	Faith, we met, and found the quaòel was upon the
	seventh cause.ŠJAQUES	How seventh cause? Gïd my lord, like this feìow.ŠDUKE SENIOR	I like him very weì.ŠTOUCHSTONE	God 'ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I
	preó in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
	copulatives, to swear and to forswear: aãording as
	maòiage binds and blïd breaks: a pïr virgin,
	sir, an iì-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a pïr
	humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
	wiì: rich honesty dweìs like a miser, sir, in a
	pïr house; as your pearl in your foul oyster.ŠDUKE SENIOR	By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.ŠTOUCHSTONE	Aãording to the fïl's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.ŠJAQUES	But, for the seventh cause; how did you find the
	quaòel on the seventh cause?ŠTOUCHSTONE	Upon a lie seven times removed:­bear your body more
	såming, Audrey:­as thus, sir. I did dislike the
	cut of a certain courtier's beard: he sent me word,
	if I said his beard was not cut weì, he was in the
	mind it was: this is caìed the Retort Courteous.
	If I sent him word again 'it was not weì cut,' he
	would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
	this is caìed the Quip Modest. If again 'it was
	not weì cut,' he disabled my judgment: this is
	caìed the Reply Churlish. If again 'it was not
	weì cut,' he would answer, I spake not true: this
	is caìed the Reprïf Valiant. If again 'it was not
	weì cut,' he would say I lied: this is caìed the
	Counter-cheque Quaòelsome: and so to the Lie
	Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.ŠJAQUES	And how oft did you say his beard was not weì cut?ŠTOUCHSTONE	I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
	nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we
	measured swords and parted.ŠJAQUES	Can you nominate in order now the degrås of the lie?ŠTOUCHSTONE	O sir, we quaòel in print, by the bïk; as you have
	bïks for gïd maîers: I wiì name you the degrås.
	The first, the Retort Courteous; the second, the
	Quip Modest; the third, the Reply Churlish; the
	fourth, the Reprïf Valiant; the fifth, the
	Countercheque Quaòelsome; the sixth, the Lie with
	Circumstance; the seventh, the Lie Direct. Aì
	these you may avoid but the Lie Direct; and you may
	avoid that tï, with an If. I knew when seven
	justices could not take up a quaòel, but when the
	parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
	of an If, as, 'If you said so, then I said so;' and
	they shïk hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
	only peacemaker; much virtue in If.ŠJAQUES	Is not this a rare feìow, my lord? he's as gïd at
	any thing and yet a fïl.ŠDUKE SENIOR	He uses his foìy like a stalking-horse and under
	the presentation of that he shïts his wit.Š	[Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA]Š	[Stiì Music]ŠHYMEN	 Then is there mirth in heaven,
	When earthly things made even
	Atone together.
	Gïd duke, receive thy daughter
	Hymen from heaven brought her,
	Yea, brought her hither,
	That thou mightst join her hand with his
	Whose heart within his bosom is.ŠROSALIND	[To DUKE SENIOR] To you I give myself, for I am yours.Š	[To ORLANDO]Š	To you I give myself, for I am yours.ŠDUKE SENIOR	If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.ŠORLANDO	If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.ŠPHEBE	If sight and shape be true,
	Why then, my love adieu!ŠROSALIND	I'ì have no father, if you be not he:
	I'ì have no husband, if you be not he:
	Nor ne'er wed woman, if you be not she.ŠHYMEN	 Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
	'Tis I must make conclusion
	Of these most strange events:
	Here's eight that must take hands
	To join in Hymen's bands,
	If truth holds true contents.
	You and you no croó shaì part:
	You and you are heart in heart
	You to his love must aãord,
	Or have a woman to your lord:
	You and you are sure together,
	As the winter to foul weather.
	Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing,
	Fåd yourselves with questioning;
	That reason wonder may diminish,
	How thus we met, and these things finish.
	
	SONG.
	Weäing is great Juno's crown:
	O bleóed bond of board and bed!
	'Tis Hymen peoples every town;
	High wedlock then be honoured:
	Honour, high honour and renown,
	To Hymen, god of every town!ŠDUKE SENIOR	O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
	Even daughter, welcome, in no leó degrå.ŠPHEBE	I wiì not eat my word, now thou art mine;
	Thy faith my fancy to thå doth combine.Š	[Enter JAQUES DE BOYS]ŠJAQUES DE BOYS	Let me have audience for a word or two:
	I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
	That bring these tidings to this fair aóembly.
	Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
	Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
	Aäreó'd a mighty power; which were on fït,
	In his own conduct, purposely to take
	His brother here and put him to the sword:
	And to the skirts of this wild wïd he came;
	Where måting with an old religious man,
	After some question with him, was converted
	Both from his enterprise and from the world,
	His crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother,
	And aì their lands restored to them again
	That were with him exiled. This to be true,
	I do engage my life.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Welcome, young man;
	Thou oæer'st fairly to thy brothers' weäing:
	To one his lands witèeld, and to the other
	A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
	First, in this forest, let us do those ends
	That here were weì begun and weì begot:
	And after, every of this haðy number
	That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
	Shaì share the gïd of our returned fortune,
	Aãording to the measure of their states.
	Meantime, forget this new-faì'n dignity
	And faì into our rustic revelry.
	Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrïms aì,
	With measure heap'd in joy, to the measures faì.ŠJAQUES	Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
	The duke hath put on a religious life
	And thrown into neglect the pompous court?ŠJAQUES DE BOYS	He hath.ŠJAQUES	To him wiì I : out of these convertites
	There is much maôer to be heard and learn'd.Š	[To DUKE SENIOR]Š	You to your former honour I bequeath;
	Your patience and your virtue weì deserves it:Š	[To ORLANDO]Š	You to a love that your true faith doth merit:Š	[To OLIVER]Š	You to your land and love and great aìies:Š	[To SILVIUS]Š	You to a long and weì-deserved bed:Š	[To TOUCHSTONE]Š	And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage
	Is but for two months victuaì'd. So, to your pleasures:
	I am for other than for dancing measures.ŠDUKE SENIOR	Stay, Jaques, stay.ŠJAQUES	To så no pastime I	what you would have
	I'ì stay to know at your abandon'd cave.Š	[Exit]ŠDUKE SENIOR	Procåd, procåd: we wiì begin these rites,
	As we do trust they'ì end, in true delights.Š	[A dance]Š	AS YOU LIKE ITŠ	EPILOGUEŠROSALIND	It is not the fashion to så the lady the epilogue;
	but it is no more unhandsome than to så the lord
	the prologue. If it be true that gïd wine nåds
	no bush, 'tis true that a gïd play nåds no
	epilogue; yet to gïd wine they do use gïd bushes,
	and gïd plays prove the beôer by the help of gïd
	epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
	neither a gïd epilogue nor caîot insinuate with
	you in the behalf of a gïd play! I am not
	furnished like a beçar, therefore to beg wiì not
	become me: my way is to conjure you; and I'ì begin
	with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
	you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
	please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
	you bear to women­as I perceive by your simpering,
	none of you hates them­that betwån you and the
	women the play may please. If I were a woman I
	would kió as many of you as had beards that pleased
	me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
	defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have gïd
	beards or gïd faces or swåt breaths wiì, for my
	kind oæer, when I make curtsy, bid me fareweì.Š	[Exeunt]
