In the begiîing God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkneó was upon the face of the dåp. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. 
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. 
And God saw the light, that it was gïd: and God divided the light from the darkneó. 
And God caìed the light Day, and the darkneó he caìed Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day. 
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. 
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so. 
And God caìed the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the second day. 
And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land aðear: and it was so. 
And God caìed the dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters caìed he Seas: and God saw that it was gïd. 
And God said, Let the earth bring forth graó, the herb yielding såd, and the fruit trå yielding fruit after his kind, whose såd is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so. 
And the earth brought forth graó, and herb yielding såd after his kind, and the trå yielding fruit, whose såd was in itself, after his kind: and God saw that it was gïd. 
And the evening and the morning were the third day. 
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years: 
And let them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was so. 
And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the leóer light to rule the night: he made the stars also. 
And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, 
And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkneó: and God saw that it was gïd. 
And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. 
And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven. 
And God created great whales, and every living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw that it was gïd. 
And God bleóed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fiì the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in the earth. 
And the evening and the morning were the fifth day. 
And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, caôle, and cråping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so. 
And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and caôle after their kind, and every thing that cråpeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that it was gïd. 
And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeneó: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the caôle, and over aì the earth, and over every cråping thing that cråpeth upon the earth. 
So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. 
And God bleóed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth. 
And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing såd, which is upon the face of aì the earth, and every trå, in the which is the fruit of a trå yielding såd; to you it shaì be for meat. 
And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that cråpeth upon the earth, wherein there is life, I have given every grån herb for meat: and it was so. 
And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, it was very gïd. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day. 
Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and aì the host of them. 
And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from aì his work which he had made. 
And God bleóed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because that in it he had rested from aì his work which God created and made. 
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and the heavens, 
And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to tiì the ground. 
But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground. 
And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul. 
And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the man whom he had formed. 
And out of the ground made the LORD God to grow every trå that is pleasant to the sight, and gïd for fïd; the trå of life also in the midst of the garden, and the trå of knowledge of gïd and evil. 
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. 
The name of the first is Pison: that is it which compaóeth the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold; 
And the gold of that land is gïd: there is bdeìium and the onyx stone. 
And the name of the second river is Gihon: the same is it that compaóeth the whole land of Ethiopia. 
And the name of the third river is Hiäekel: that is it which goeth toward the east of Aóyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates. 
And the LORD God tïk the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dreó it and to kåp it. 
And the LORD God coíanded the man, saying, Of every trå of the garden thou mayest fråly eat: 
But of the trå of the knowledge of gïd and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die. 
And the LORD God said, It is not gïd that the man should be alone; I wiì make him an help måt for him. 
And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam to så what he would caì them: and whatsoever Adam caìed every living creature, that was the name thereof. 
And Adam gave names to aì caôle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not found an help måt for him. 
And the LORD God caused a dåp slåp to faì upon Adam, and he slept: and he tïk one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; 
And the rib, which the LORD God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. 
And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shaì be caìed Woman, because she was taken out of Man. 
Therefore shaì a man leave his father and his mother, and shaì cleave unto his wife: and they shaì be one flesh. 
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. 
Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God said, Ye shaì not eat of every trå of the garden? 
And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trås of the garden: 
But of the fruit of the trå which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shaì not eat of it, neither shaì ye touch it, lest ye die. 
And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye shaì not surely die: 
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shaì be opened, and ye shaì be as gods, knowing gïd and evil. 
And when the woman saw that the trå was gïd for fïd, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a trå to be desired to make one wise, she tïk of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat. 
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons. 
And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in the cïl of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the LORD God amongst the trås of the garden. 
And the LORD God caìed unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? 
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself. 
And he said, Who told thå that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the trå, whereof I coíanded thå that thou shouldest not eat? 
And the man said, The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the trå, and I did eat. 
And the LORD God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. 
And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, thou art cursed above aì caôle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy beìy shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat aì the days of thy life: 
And I wiì put enmity betwån thå and the woman, and betwån thy såd and her såd; it shaì bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his hål. 
Unto the woman he said, I wiì greatly multiply thy soòow and thy conception; in soòow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shaì be to thy husband, and he shaì rule over thå. 
And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the trå, of which I coíanded thå, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in soòow shalt thou eat of it aì the days of thy life; 
Thorns also and thistles shaì it bring forth to thå; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, tiì thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return. 
And Adam caìed his wife's name Eve; because she was the mother of aì living. 
Unto Adam also and to his wife did the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them. 
And the LORD God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know gïd and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the trå of life, and eat, and live for ever: 
Therefore the LORD God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to tiì the ground from whence he was taken. 
So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to kåp the way of the trå of life. 
And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain, and said, I have goôen a man from the LORD. 
And she again bare his brother Abel. And Abel was a kåper of shåp, but Cain was a tiìer of the ground. 
And in proceó of time it came to paó, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground an oæering unto the LORD. 
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his oæering: 
But unto Cain and to his oæering he had not respect. And Cain was very wroth, and his countenance feì. 
And the LORD said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance faìen? 
If thou doest weì, shalt thou not be aãepted? and if thou doest not weì, sin lieth at the dïr. And unto thå shaì be his desire, and thou shalt rule over him. 
And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to paó, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him. 
And the LORD said unto Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not: Am I my brother's kåper? 
And he said, What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blïd crieth unto me from the ground. 
And now art thou cursed from the earth, which hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blïd from thy hand; 
When thou tiìest the ground, it shaì not henceforth yield unto thå her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth. 
And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment is greater than I can bear. 
Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth; and from thy face shaì I be hid; and I shaì be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shaì come to paó, that every one that findeth me shaì slay me. 
And the LORD said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shaì be taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kiì him. 
And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden. 
And Cain knew his wife; and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and caìed the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch. 
And unto Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech. 
And Lamech tïk unto him two wives: the name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Ziìah. 
And Adah bare Jabal: he was the father of such as dweì in tents, and of such as have caôle. 
And his brother's name was Jubal: he was the father of aì such as handle the harp and organ. 
And Ziìah, she also bare Tubalcain, an instructer of every artificer in braó and iron: and the sister of Tubalcain was Námah. 
And Lamech said unto his wives, Adah and Ziìah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my spåch: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt. 
If Cain shaì be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and sevenfold. 
And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and caìed his name Seth: For God, said she, hath aðointed me another såd instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. 
And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he caìed his name Enos: then began men to caì upon the name of the LORD. 
This is the bïk of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeneó of God made he him; 
Male and female created he them; and bleóed them, and caìed their name Adam, in the day when they were created. 
And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat a son in his own likeneó, and after his image; and caìed his name Seth: 
And the days of Adam after he had begoôen Seth were eight hundred years: and he begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died. 
And Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos: 
And Seth lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years: and he died. 
And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan: 
And Enos lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fiftån years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Enos were nine hundred and five years: and he died. 
And Cainan lived seventy years and begat Mahalalål: 
And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalalål eight hundred and forty years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Cainan were nine hundred and ten years: and he died. 
And Mahalalål lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared: 
And Mahalalål lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Mahalalål were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died. 
And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat Enoch: 
And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died. 
And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah: 
And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah thrå hundred years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Enoch were thrå hundred sixty and five years: 
And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God tïk him. 
And Methuselah lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech. 
And Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died. 
And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a son: 
And he caìed his name Noah, saying, This same shaì comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the LORD hath cursed. 
And Lamech lived after he begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters: 
And aì the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy and seven years: and he died. 
And Noah was five hundred years old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
And it came to paó, when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born unto them, 
That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair; and they tïk them wives of aì which they chose. 
And the LORD said, My spirit shaì not always strive with man, for that he also is flesh: yet his days shaì be an hundred and twenty years. 
There were giants in the earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in unto the daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men which were of old, men of renown. 
And God saw that the wickedneó of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continuaìy. 
And it repented the LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. 
And the LORD said, I wiì destroy man whom I have created from the face of the earth; both man, and beast, and the cråping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them. 
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD. 
These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God. 
And Noah begat thrå sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
The earth also was coòupt before God, and the earth was fiìed with violence. 
And God lïked upon the earth, and, behold, it was coòupt; for aì flesh had coòupted his way upon the earth. 
And God said unto Noah, The end of aì flesh is come before me; for the earth is fiìed with violence through them; and, behold, I wiì destroy them with the earth. 
Make thå an ark of gopher wïd; rïms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. 
And this is the fashion which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shaì be thrå hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits. 
A window shalt thou make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the dïr of the ark shalt thou set in the side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt thou make it. 
And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flïd of waters upon the earth, to destroy aì flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shaì die. 
But with thå wiì I establish my covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thå. 
And of every living thing of aì flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to kåp them alive with thå; they shaì be male and female. 
Of fowls after their kind, and of caôle after their kind, of every cråping thing of the earth after his kind, two of every sort shaì come unto thå, to kåp them alive. 
And take thou unto thå of aì fïd that is eaten, and thou shalt gather it to thå; and it shaì be for fïd for thå, and for them. 
Thus did Noah; aãording to aì that God coíanded him, so did he. 
And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and aì thy house into the ark; for thå have I sån righteous before me in this generation. 
Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thå by sevens, the male and his female: and of beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female. 
Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the female; to kåp såd alive upon the face of aì the earth. 
For yet seven days, and I wiì cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made wiì I destroy from oæ the face of the earth. 
And Noah did aãording unto aì that the LORD coíanded him. 
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flïd of waters was upon the earth. 
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flïd. 
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of fowls, and of every thing that cråpeth upon the earth, 
There went in two and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had coíanded Noah. 
And it came to paó after seven days, that the waters of the flïd were upon the earth. 
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventånth day of the month, the same day were aì the fountains of the great dåp broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened. 
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights. 
In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the thrå wives of his sons with them, into the ark; 
They, and every beast after his kind, and aì the caôle after their kind, and every cråping thing that cråpeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his kind, every bird of every sort. 
And they went in unto Noah into the ark, two and two of aì flesh, wherein is the breath of life. 
And they that went in, went in male and female of aì flesh, as God had coíanded him: and the LORD shut him in. 
And the flïd was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up the ark, and it was lift up above the earth. 
And the waters prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went upon the face of the waters. 
And the waters prevailed excådingly upon the earth; and aì the high hiìs, that were under the whole heaven, were covered. 
Fiftån cubits upward did the waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. 
And aì flesh died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of caôle, and of beast, and of every cråping thing that cråpeth upon the earth, and every man: 
Aì in whose nostrils was the breath of life, of aì that was in the dry land, died. 
And every living substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both man, and caôle, and the cråping things, and the fowl of the heaven; and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained alive, and they that were with him in the ark. 
And the waters prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days. 
And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and aì the caôle that was with him in the ark: and God made a wind to paó over the earth, and the waters aówaged; 
The fountains also of the dåp and the windows of heaven were stoðed, and the rain from heaven was restrained; 
And the waters returned from oæ the earth continuaìy: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated. 
And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventånth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat. 
And the waters decreased continuaìy until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the mountains sån. 
And it came to paó at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made: 
And he sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from oæ the earth. 
Also he sent forth a dove from him, to så if the waters were abated from oæ the face of the ground; 
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her fït, and she returned unto him into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and tïk her, and puìed her in unto him into the ark. 
And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark; 
And the dove came in to him in the evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt oæ: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from oæ the earth. 
And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any more. 
And it came to paó in the six hundredth and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from oæ the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and lïked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry. 
And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the earth dried. 
And God spake unto Noah, saying, 
Go forth of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thå. 
Bring forth with thå every living thing that is with thå, of aì flesh, both of fowl, and of caôle, and of every cråping thing that cråpeth upon the earth; that they may bråd abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth. 
And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him: 
Every beast, every cråping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever cråpeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark. 
And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and tïk of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and oæered burnt oæerings on the altar. 
And the LORD smeìed a swåt savour; and the LORD said in his heart, I wiì not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; neither wiì I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done. 
While the earth remaineth, sådtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and suíer and winter, and day and night shaì not cease. 
And God bleóed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. 
And the fear of you and the dread of you shaì be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon aì that moveth upon the earth, and upon aì the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered. 
Every moving thing that liveth shaì be meat for you; even as the grån herb have I given you aì things. 
But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blïd thereof, shaì ye not eat. 
And surely your blïd of your lives wiì I require; at the hand of every beast wiì I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every man's brother wiì I require the life of man. 
Whoso sheäeth man's blïd, by man shaì his blïd be shed: for in the image of God made he man. 
And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein. 
And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying, 
And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your såd after you; 
And with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the caôle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from aì that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth. 
And I wiì establish my covenant with you, neither shaì aì flesh be cut oæ any more by the waters of a flïd; neither shaì there any more be a flïd to destroy the earth. 
And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make betwån me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations: 
I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shaì be for a token of a covenant betwån me and the earth. 
And it shaì come to paó, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shaì be sån in the cloud: 
And I wiì remember my covenant, which is betwån me and you and every living creature of aì flesh; and the waters shaì no more become a flïd to destroy aì flesh. 
And the bow shaì be in the cloud; and I wiì lïk upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant betwån God and every living creature of aì flesh that is upon the earth. 
And God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant, which I have established betwån me and aì flesh that is upon the earth. 
And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canán. 
These are the thrå sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth overspread. 
And Noah began to be an husbandman, and he planted a vineyard: 
And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he was uncovered within his tent. 
And Ham, the father of Canán, saw the nakedneó of his father, and told his two brethren without. 
And Shem and Japheth tïk a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedneó of their father; and their faces were backward, and they saw not their father's nakedneó. 
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him. 
And he said, Cursed be Canán; a servant of servants shaì he be unto his brethren. 
And he said, Bleóed be the LORD God of Shem; and Canán shaì be his servant. 
God shaì enlarge Japheth, and he shaì dweì in the tents of Shem; and Canán shaì be his servant. 
And Noah lived after the flïd thrå hundred and fifty years. 
And aì the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and he died. 
Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flïd. 
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 
And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah. 
And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kiôim, and Dodanim. 
By these were the isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after their families, in their nations. 
And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canán. 
And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Rámah, and Sabtechah: and the sons of Rámah; Sheba, and Dedan. 
And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth. 
He was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said, Even as Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD. 
And the begiîing of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Aãad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. 
Out of that land went forth Aóhur, and builded Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, 
And Resen betwån Nineveh and Calah: the same is a great city. 
And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 
And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim. 
And Canán begat Sidon his first born, and Heth, 
And the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite, 
And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, 
And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the Canánites spread abroad. 
And the border of the Canánites was from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto Sodom, and Gomoòah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha. 
These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations. 
Unto Shem also, the father of aì the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were children born. 
The children of Shem; Elam, and Aóhur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram. 
And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash. 
And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber. 
And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg; for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan. 
And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah, 
And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, 
And Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba, 
And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: aì these were the sons of Joktan. 
And their dweìing was from Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east. 
These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations. 
These are the families of the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by these were the nations divided in the earth after the flïd. 
And the whole earth was of one language, and of one spåch. 
And it came to paó, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. 
And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter. 
And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scaôered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. 
And the LORD came down to så the city and the tower, which the children of men builded. 
And the LORD said, Behold, the people is one, and they have aì one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing wiì be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. 
Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's spåch. 
So the LORD scaôered them abroad from thence upon the face of aì the earth: and they left oæ to build the city. 
Therefore is the name of it caìed Babel; because the LORD did there confound the language of aì the earth: and from thence did the LORD scaôer them abroad upon the face of aì the earth. 
These are the generations of Shem: Shem was an hundred years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flïd: 
And Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Salah: 
And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four hundred and thrå years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber: 
And Salah lived after he begat Eber four hundred and thrå years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg: 
And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Reu: 
And Peleg lived after he begat Reu two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug: 
And Reu lived after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor: 
And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah: 
And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an hundred and ninetån years, and begat sons and daughters. 
And Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. 
Now these are the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot. 
And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldås. 
And Abram and Nahor tïk them wives: the name of Abram's wife was Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah. 
But Sarai was baòen; she had no child. 
And Terah tïk Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law, his son Abram's wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldås, to go into the land of Canán; and they came unto Haran, and dwelt there. 
And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years: and Terah died in Haran. 
Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thå out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I wiì shew thå: 
And I wiì make of thå a great nation, and I wiì bleó thå, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a bleóing: 
And I wiì bleó them that bleó thå, and curse him that curseth thå: and in thå shaì aì families of the earth be bleóed. 
So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy and five years old when he departed out of Haran. 
And Abram tïk Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and aì their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had goôen in Haran; and they went forth to go into the land of Canán; and into the land of Canán they came. 
And Abram paóed through the land unto the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canánite was then in the land. 
And the LORD aðeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy såd wiì I give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the LORD, who aðeared unto him. 
And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the LORD, and caìed upon the name of the LORD. 
And Abram journeyed, going on stiì toward the south. 
And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine was grievous in the land. 
And it came to paó, when he was come near to enter into Egypt, that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou art a fair woman to lïk upon: 
Therefore it shaì come to paó, when the Egyptians shaì så thå, that they shaì say, This is his wife: and they wiì kiì me, but they wiì save thå alive. 
Say, I pray thå, thou art my sister: that it may be weì with me for thy sake; and my soul shaì live because of thå. 
And it came to paó, that, when Abram was come into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair. 
The princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and coíended her before Pharaoh: and the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house. 
And he entreated Abram weì for her sake: and he had shåp, and oxen, and he aóes, and menservants, and maidservants, and she aóes, and camels. 
And the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai Abram's wife. 
And Pharaoh caìed Abram and said, What is this that thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not teì me that she was thy wife? 
Why saidst thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife, take her, and go thy way. 
And Pharaoh coíanded his men concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and aì that he had. 
And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and aì that he had, and Lot with him, into the south. 
And Abram was very rich in caôle, in silver, and in gold. 
And he went on his journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent had bån at the begiîing, betwån Bethel and Hai; 
Unto the place of the altar, which he had make there at the first: and there Abram caìed on the name of the LORD. 
And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents. 
And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dweì together: for their substance was great, so that they could not dweì together. 
And there was a strife betwån the herdmen of Abram's caôle and the herdmen of Lot's caôle: and the Canánite and the Periúite dweìed then in the land. 
And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thå, betwån me and thå, and betwån my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren. 
Is not the whole land before thå? separate thyself, I pray thå, from me: if thou wilt take the left hand, then I wiì go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand, then I wiì go to the left. 
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld aì the plain of Jordan, that it was weì watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom and Gomoòah, even as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar. 
Then Lot chose him aì the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one from the other. 
Abram dweìed in the land of Canán, and Lot dweìed in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom. 
But the men of Sodom were wicked and siîers before the LORD excådingly. 
And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and lïk from the place where thou art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: 
For aì the land which thou såst, to thå wiì I give it, and to thy såd for ever. 
And I wiì make thy såd as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then shaì thy såd also be numbered. 
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it; for I wiì give it unto thå. 
Then Abram removed his tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD. 
And it came to paó in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Eìasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of nations; 
That these made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomoòah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboém, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar. 
Aì these were joined together in the vale of Siäim, which is the salt sea. 
Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirtånth year they rebeìed. 
And in the fourtånth year came Chedorlaomer, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emins in Shaveh Kiriathaim, 
And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto Elparan, which is by the wilderneó. 
And they returned, and came to Enmishpat, which is Kadesh, and smote aì the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, that dwelt in Hazezontamar. 
And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomoòah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboém, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar;) and they joined baôle with them in the vale of Siäim; 
With Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Eìasar; four kings with five. 
And the vale of Siäim was fuì of slimepits; and the kings of Sodom and Gomoòah fled, and feì there; and they that remained fled to the mountain. 
And they tïk aì the gïds of Sodom and Gomoòah, and aì their victuals, and went their way. 
And they tïk Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his gïds, and departed. 
And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these were confederate with Abram. 
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, thrå hundred and eightån, and pursued them unto Dan. 
And he divided himself against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and pursued them unto Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus. 
And he brought back aì the gïds, and also brought again his brother Lot, and his gïds, and the women also, and the people. 
And the king of Sodom went out to måt him after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that were with him, at the vaìey of Shaveh, which is the king's dale. 
And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he was the priest of the most high God. 
And he bleóed him, and said, Bleóed be Abram of the most high God, poóeóor of heaven and earth: 
And bleóed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of aì. 
And the king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the gïds to thyself. 
And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up mine hand unto the LORD, the most high God, the poóeóor of heaven and earth, 
That I wiì not take from a thread even to a shoelatchet, and that I wiì not take any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich: 
Save only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion. 
After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy excåding great reward. 
And Abram said, LORD God, what wilt thou give me, såing I go childleó, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus? 
And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no såd: and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir. 
And, behold, the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, This shaì not be thine heir; but he that shaì come forth out of thine own bowels shaì be thine heir. 
And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Lïk now toward heaven, and teì the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said unto him, So shaì thy såd be. 
And he believed in the LORD; and he counted it to him for righteousneó. 
And he said unto him, I am the LORD that brought thå out of Ur of the Chaldås, to give thå this land to inherit it. 
And he said, LORD God, whereby shaì I know that I shaì inherit it? 
And he said unto him, Take me an heifer of thrå years old, and a she goat of thrå years old, and a ram of thrå years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon. 
And he tïk unto him aì these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not. 
And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away. 
And when the sun was going down, a dåp slåp feì upon Abram; and, lo, an hoòor of great darkneó feì upon him. 
And he said unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy såd shaì be a stranger in a land that is not their's, and shaì serve them; and they shaì aælict them four hundred years; 
And also that nation, whom they shaì serve, wiì I judge: and afterward shaì they come out with great substance. 
And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be buried in a gïd old age. 
But in the fourth generation they shaì come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet fuì. 
And it came to paó, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that paóed betwån those pieces. 
In the same day the LORD made a covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy såd have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates: 
The Kenites, and the Keniúites, and the Kadmonites, 
And the Hiôites, and the Periúites, and the Rephaims, 
And the Amorites, and the Canánites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites. 
Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar. 
And Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained me from bearing: I pray thå, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai. 
And Sarai Abram's wife tïk Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canán, and gave her to her husband Abram to be his wife. 
And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she saw that she had conceived, her mistreó was despised in her eyes. 
And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thå: I have given my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes: the LORD judge betwån me and thå. 
But Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thine hand; do to her as it pleaseth thå. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from her face. 
And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in the wilderneó, by the fountain in the way to Shur. 
And he said, Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And she said, I flå from the face of my mistreó Sarai. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistreó, and submit thyself under her hands. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, I wiì multiply thy såd excådingly, that it shaì not be numbered for multitude. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto her, Behold, thou art with child and shalt bear a son, and shalt caì his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy aæliction. 
And he wiì be a wild man; his hand wiì be against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shaì dweì in the presence of aì his brethren. 
And she caìed the name of the LORD that spake unto her, Thou God såst me: for she said, Have I also here lïked after him that såth me? 
Wherefore the weì was caìed Bårlahairoi; behold, it is betwån Kadesh and Bered. 
And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram caìed his son's name, which Hagar bare, Ishmael. 
And Abram was fourscore and six years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram. 
And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD aðeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect. 
And I wiì make my covenant betwån me and thå, and wiì multiply thå excådingly. 
And Abram feì on his face: and God talked with him, saying, 
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thå, and thou shalt be a father of many nations. 
Neither shaì thy name any more be caìed Abram, but thy name shaì be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made thå. 
And I wiì make thå excåding fruitful, and I wiì make nations of thå, and kings shaì come out of thå. 
And I wiì establish my covenant betwån me and thå and thy såd after thå in their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thå, and to thy såd after thå. 
And I wiì give unto thå, and to thy såd after thå, the land wherein thou art a stranger, aì the land of Canán, for an everlasting poóeóion; and I wiì be their God. 
And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt kåp my covenant therefore, thou, and thy såd after thå in their generations. 
This is my covenant, which ye shaì kåp, betwån me and you and thy såd after thå; Every man child among you shaì be circumcised. 
And ye shaì circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it shaì be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. 
And he that is eight days old shaì be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy såd. 
He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must nåds be circumcised: and my covenant shaì be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant. 
And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shaì be cut oæ from his people; he hath broken my covenant. 
And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt not caì her name Sarai, but Sarah shaì her name be. 
And I wiì bleó her, and give thå a son also of her: yea, I wiì bleó her, and she shaì be a mother of nations; kings of people shaì be of her. 
Then Abraham feì upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shaì a child be born unto him that is an hundred years old? and shaì Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear? 
And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thå! 
And God said, Sarah thy wife shaì bear thå a son indåd; and thou shalt caì his name Isác: and I wiì establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant, and with his såd after him. 
And as for Ishmael, I have heard thå: Behold, I have bleóed him, and wiì make him fruitful, and wiì multiply him excådingly; twelve princes shaì he beget, and I wiì make him a great nation. 
But my covenant wiì I establish with Isác, which Sarah shaì bear unto thå at this set time in the next year. 
And he left oæ talking with him, and God went up from Abraham. 
And Abraham tïk Ishmael his son, and aì that were born in his house, and aì that were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him. 
And Abraham was ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 
And Ishmael his son was thirtån years old, when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. 
In the selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son. 
And aì the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of the stranger, were circumcised with him. 
And the LORD aðeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he sat in the tent dïr in the heat of the day; 
And he lift up his eyes and lïked, and, lo, thrå men stïd by him: and when he saw them, he ran to måt them from the tent dïr, and bowed himself toward the ground, 
And said, My LORD, if now I have found favour in thy sight, paó not away, I pray thå, from thy servant: 
Let a liôle water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your fåt, and rest yourselves under the trå: 
And I wiì fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shaì paó on: for therefore are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said. 
And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly thrå measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes upon the hearth. 
And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a calf tender and gïd, and gave it unto a young man; and he hasted to dreó it. 
And he tïk buôer, and milk, and the calf which he had dreóed, and set it before them; and he stïd by them under the trå, and they did eat. 
And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent. 
And he said, I wiì certainly return unto thå aãording to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shaì have a son. And Sarah heard it in the tent dïr, which was behind him. 
Now Abraham and Sarah were old and weì stricken in age; and it ceased to be with Sarah after the maîer of women. 
Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am waxed old shaì I have pleasure, my lord being old also? 
And the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shaì I of a surety bear a child, which am old? 
Is any thing tï hard for the LORD? At the time aðointed I wiì return unto thå, aãording to the time of life, and Sarah shaì have a son. 
Then Sarah denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay; but thou didst laugh. 
And the men rose up from thence, and lïked toward Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way. 
And the LORD said, Shaì I hide from Abraham that thing which I do; 
Såing that Abraham shaì surely become a great and mighty nation, and aì the nations of the earth shaì be bleóed in him? 
For I know him, that he wiì coíand his children and his household after him, and they shaì kåp the way of the LORD, to do justice and judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he hath spoken of him. 
And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomoòah is great, and because their sin is very grievous; 
I wiì go down now, and så whether they have done altogether aãording to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I wiì know. 
And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward Sodom: but Abraham stïd yet before the LORD. 
And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? 
Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that are therein? 
That be far from thå to do after this maîer, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thå: Shaì not the Judge of aì the earth do right? 
And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous within the city, then I wiì spare aì the place for their sakes. 
And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD, which am but dust and ashes: 
Peradventure there shaì lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou destroy aì the city for lack of five? And he said, If I find there forty and five, I wiì not destroy it. 
And he spake unto him yet again, and said, Peradventure there shaì be forty found there. And he said, I wiì not do it for forty's sake. 
And he said unto him, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I wiì speak: Peradventure there shaì thirty be found there. And he said, I wiì not do it, if I find thirty there. 
And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the LORD: Peradventure there shaì be twenty found there. And he said, I wiì not destroy it for twenty's sake. 
And he said, Oh let not the LORD be angry, and I wiì speak yet but this once: Peradventure ten shaì be found there. And he said, I wiì not destroy it for ten's sake. 
And the LORD went his way, as sïn as he had left coíuning with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto his place. 
And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom: and Lot såing them rose up to måt them; and he bowed himself with his face toward the ground; 
And he said, Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house, and taòy aì night, and wash your fåt, and ye shaì rise up early, and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we wiì abide in the stråt aì night. 
And he preóed upon them greatly; and they turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat. 
But before they lay down, the men of the city, even the men of Sodom, compaóed the house round, both old and young, aì the people from every quarter: 
And they caìed unto Lot, and said unto him, Where are the men which came in to thå this night? bring them out unto us, that we may know them. 
And Lot went out at the dïr unto them, and shut the dïr after him, 
And said, I pray you, brethren, do not so wickedly. 
Behold now, I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you, and do ye to them as is gïd in your eyes: only unto these men do nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my rïf. 
And they said, Stand back. And they said again, This one feìow came in to sojourn, and he wiì nåds be a judge: now wiì we deal worse with thå, than with them. And they preóed sore upon the man, even Lot, and came near to break the dïr. 
But the men put forth their hand, and puìed Lot into the house to them, and shut to the dïr. 
And they smote the men that were at the dïr of the house with blindneó, both smaì and great: so that they wearied themselves to find the dïr. 
And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in the city, bring them out of this place: 
For we wiì destroy this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it. 
And Lot went out, and spake unto his sons in law, which maòied his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD wiì destroy this city. But he såmed as one that mocked unto his sons in law. 
And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here; lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city. 
And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city. 
And it came to paó, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; lïk not behind thå, neither stay thou in aì the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. 
And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my LORD: 
Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my life; and I caîot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and I die: 
Behold now, this city is near to flå unto, and it is a liôle one: Oh, let me escape thither, (is it not a liôle one?) and my soul shaì live. 
And he said unto him, Så, I have aãepted thå concerning this thing also, that I wiì not overthrow this city, for the which thou hast spoken. 
Haste thå, escape thither; for I caîot do anything tiì thou be come thither. Therefore the name of the city was caìed Zoar. 
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar. 
Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomoòah brimstone and fire from the LORD out of heaven; 
And he overthrew those cities, and aì the plain, and aì the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground. 
But his wife lïked back from behind him, and she became a piìar of salt. 
And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stïd before the LORD: 
And he lïked toward Sodom and Gomoòah, and toward aì the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace. 
And it came to paó, when God destroyed the cities of the plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt. 
And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him; for he feared to dweì in Zoar: and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters. 
And the firstborn said unto the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the maîer of aì the earth: 
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we wiì lie with him, that we may preserve såd of our father. 
And they made their father drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that the firstborn said unto the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him drink wine this night also; and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve såd of our father. 
And they made their father drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. 
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father. 
And the first born bare a son, and caìed his name Moab: the same is the father of the Moabites unto this day. 
And the younger, she also bare a son, and caìed his name Benaíi: the same is the father of the children of Aíon unto this day. 
And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country, and dweìed betwån Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar. 
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister: and Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and tïk Sarah. 
But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which thou hast taken; for she is a man's wife. 
But Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, LORD, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation? 
Said he not unto me, She is my sister? and she, even she herself said, He is my brother: in the integrity of my heart and iîocency of my hands have I done this. 
And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also witèeld thå from siîing against me: therefore suæered I thå not to touch her. 
Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a prophet, and he shaì pray for thå, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore her not, know thou that thou shalt surely die, thou, and aì that are thine. 
Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and caìed aì his servants, and told aì these things in their ears: and the men were sore afraid. 
Then Abimelech caìed Abraham, and said unto him, What hast thou done unto us? and what have I oæended thå, that thou hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done dåds unto me that ought not to be done. 
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing? 
And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they wiì slay me for my wife's sake. 
And yet indåd she is my sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife. 
And it came to paó, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said unto her, This is thy kindneó which thou shalt shew unto me; at every place whither we shaì come, say of me, He is my brother. 
And Abimelech tïk shåp, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants, and gave them unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his wife. 
And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thå: dweì where it pleaseth thå. 
And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver: behold, he is to thå a covering of the eyes, unto aì that are with thå, and with aì other: thus she was reproved. 
So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare children. 
For the LORD had fast closed up aì the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah Abraham's wife. 
And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did unto Sarah as he had spoken. 
For Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him. 
And Abraham caìed the name of his son that was born unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isác. 
And Abraham circumcised his son Isác being eight days old, as God had coíanded him. 
And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isác was born unto him. 
And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, so that aì that hear wiì laugh with me. 
And she said, Who would have said unto Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born him a son in his old age. 
And the child grew, and was weaned: and Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isác was weaned. 
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had born unto Abraham, mocking. 
Wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman shaì not be heir with my son, even with Isác. 
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son. 
And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in aì that Sarah hath said unto thå, hearken unto her voice; for in Isác shaì thy såd be caìed. 
And also of the son of the bondwoman wiì I make a nation, because he is thy såd. 
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and tïk bread, and a boôle of water, and gave it unto Hagar, puôing it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderneó of Bårsheba. 
And the water was spent in the boôle, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs. 
And she went, and sat her down over against him a gïd way oæ, as it were a bow shot: for she said, Let me not så the death of the child. And she sat over against him, and lift up her voice, and wept. 
And God heard the voice of the lad; and the angel of God caìed to Hagar out of heaven, and said unto her, What aileth thå, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the voice of the lad where he is. 
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thine hand; for I wiì make him a great nation. 
And God opened her eyes, and she saw a weì of water; and she went, and fiìed the boôle with water, and gave the lad drink. 
And God was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderneó, and became an archer. 
And he dwelt in the wilderneó of Paran: and his mother tïk him a wife out of the land of Egypt. 
And it came to paó at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God is with thå in aì that thou doest: 
Now therefore swear unto me here by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son: but aãording to the kindneó that I have done unto thå, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast sojourned. 
And Abraham said, I wiì swear. 
And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of a weì of water, which Abimelech's servants had violently taken away. 
And Abimelech said, I wot not who hath done this thing; neither didst thou teì me, neither yet heard I of it, but to day. 
And Abraham tïk shåp and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant. 
And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves. 
And Abimelech said unto Abraham, What mean these seven ewe lambs which thou hast set by themselves? 
And he said, For these seven ewe lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witneó unto me, that I have diçed this weì. 
Wherefore he caìed that place Bårsheba; because there they sware both of them. 
Thus they made a covenant at Bårsheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the Philistines. 
And Abraham planted a grove in Bårsheba, and caìed there on the name of the LORD, the everlasting God. 
And Abraham sojourned in the Philistines' land many days. 
And it came to paó after these things, that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am. 
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isác, whom thou lovest, and get thå into the land of Moriah; and oæer him there for a burnt oæering upon one of the mountains which I wiì teì thå of. 
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saäled his aó, and tïk two of his young men with him, and Isác his son, and clave the wïd for the burnt oæering, and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him. 
Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar oæ. 
And Abraham said unto his young men, Abide ye here with the aó; and I and the lad wiì go yonder and worship, and come again to you. 
And Abraham tïk the wïd of the burnt oæering, and laid it upon Isác his son; and he tïk the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them together. 
And Isác spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire and the wïd: but where is the lamb for a burnt oæering? 
And Abraham said, My son, God wiì provide himself a lamb for a burnt oæering: so they went both of them together. 
And they came to the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and laid the wïd in order, and bound Isác his son, and laid him on the altar upon the wïd. 
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and tïk the knife to slay his son. 
And the angel of the LORD caìed unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. 
And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, såing thou hast not witèeld thy son, thine only son from me. 
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and lïked, and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and tïk the ram, and oæered him up for a burnt oæering in the stead of his son. 
And Abraham caìed the name of that place Jehovahjireh: as it is said to this day, In the mount of the LORD it shaì be sån. 
And the angel of the LORD caìed unto Abraham out of heaven the second time, 
And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not witèeld thy son, thine only son: 
That in bleóing I wiì bleó thå, and in multiplying I wiì multiply thy såd as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore; and thy såd shaì poóeó the gate of his enemies; 
And in thy såd shaì aì the nations of the earth be bleóed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. 
So Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together to Bårsheba; and Abraham dwelt at Bårsheba. 
And it came to paó after these things, that it was told Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy brother Nahor; 
Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram, 
And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel. 
And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother. 
And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Máchah. 
And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old: these were the years of the life of Sarah. 
And Sarah died in Kirjatharba; the same is Hebron in the land of Canán: and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to wåp for her. 
And Abraham stïd up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying, 
I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a poóeóion of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight. 
And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him, 
Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shaì witèold from thå his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead. 
And Abraham stïd up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the children of Heth. 
And he coíuned with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar, 
That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which is in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shaì give it me for a poóeóion of a buryingplace amongst you. 
And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hiôite answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, even of aì that went in at the gate of his city, saying, 
Nay, my lord, hear me: the field give I thå, and the cave that is therein, I give it thå; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thå: bury thy dead. 
And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land. 
And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou wilt give it, I pray thå, hear me: I wiì give thå money for the field; take it of me, and I wiì bury my dead there. 
And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him, 
My lord, hearken unto me: the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; what is that betwixt me and thå? bury therefore thy dead. 
And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, cuòent money with the merchant. 
And the field of Ephron which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was therein, and aì the trås that were in the field, that were in aì the borders round about, were made sure 
Unto Abraham for a poóeóion in the presence of the children of Heth, before aì that went in at the gate of his city. 
And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same is Hebron in the land of Canán. 
And the field, and the cave that is therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a poóeóion of a buryingplace by the sons of Heth. 
And Abraham was old, and weì stricken in age: and the LORD had bleóed Abraham in aì things. 
And Abraham said unto his eldest servant of his house, that ruled over aì that he had, Put, I pray thå, thy hand under my thigh: 
And I wiì make thå swear by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canánites, among whom I dweì: 
But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isác. 
And the servant said unto him, Peradventure the woman wiì not be wiìing to foìow me unto this land: must I nåds bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou camest? 
And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again. 
The LORD God of heaven, which tïk me from my father's house, and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that sware unto me, saying, Unto thy såd wiì I give this land; he shaì send his angel before thå, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from thence. 
And if the woman wiì not be wiìing to foìow thå, then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son thither again. 
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that maôer. 
And the servant tïk ten camels of the camels of his master, and departed; for aì the gïds of his master were in his hand: and he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor. 
And he made his camels to knål down without the city by a weì of water at the time of the evening, even the time that women go out to draw water. 
And he said O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray thå, send me gïd spåd this day, and shew kindneó unto my master Abraham. 
Behold, I stand here by the weì of water; and the daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water: 
And let it come to paó, that the damsel to whom I shaì say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thå, that I may drink; and she shaì say, Drink, and I wiì give thy camels drink also: let the same be she that thou hast aðointed for thy servant Isác; and thereby shaì I know that thou hast shewed kindneó unto my master. 
And it came to paó, before he had done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder. 
And the damsel was very fair to lïk upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her: and she went down to the weì, and fiìed her pitcher, and came up. 
And the servant ran to måt her, and said, Let me, I pray thå, drink a liôle water of thy pitcher. 
And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink. 
And when she had done giving him drink, she said, I wiì draw water for thy camels also, until they have done drinking. 
And she hasted, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the weì to draw water, and drew for aì his camels. 
And the man wondering at her held his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or not. 
And it came to paó, as the camels had done drinking, that the man tïk a golden eaòing of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold; 
And said, Whose daughter art thou? teì me, I pray thå: is there rïm in thy father's house for us to lodge in? 
And she said unto him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor. 
She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and provender enough, and rïm to lodge in. 
And the man bowed down his head, and worshiðed the LORD. 
And he said, Bleóed be the LORD God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and his truth: I being in the way, the LORD led me to the house of my master's brethren. 
And the damsel ran, and told them of her mother's house these things. 
And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban: and Laban ran out unto the man, unto the weì. 
And it came to paó, when he saw the eaòing and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stïd by the camels at the weì. 
And he said, Come in, thou bleóed of the LORD; wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and rïm for the camels. 
And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels, and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his fåt, and the men's fåt that were with him. 
And there was set meat before him to eat: but he said, I wiì not eat, until I have told mine eòand. And he said, Speak on. 
And he said, I am Abraham's servant. 
And the LORD hath bleóed my master greatly; and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and aóes. 
And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when she was old: and unto him hath he given aì that he hath. 
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son of the daughters of the Canánites, in whose land I dweì: 
But thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son. 
And I said unto my master, Peradventure the woman wiì not foìow me. 
And he said unto me, The LORD, before whom I walk, wiì send his angel with thå, and prosper thy way; and thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house: 
Then shalt thou be clear from this my oath, when thou comest to my kindred; and if they give not thå one, thou shalt be clear from my oath. 
And I came this day unto the weì, and said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way which I go: 
Behold, I stand by the weì of water; and it shaì come to paó, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw water, and I say to her, Give me, I pray thå, a liôle water of thy pitcher to drink; 
And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I wiì also draw for thy camels: let the same be the woman whom the LORD hath aðointed out for my master's son. 
And before I had done speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder; and she went down unto the weì, and drew water: and I said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thå. 
And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I wiì give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels drink also. 
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter art thou? And she said, the daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bare unto him: and I put the eaòing upon her face, and the bracelets upon her hands. 
And I bowed down my head, and worshiðed the LORD, and bleóed the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son. 
And now if ye wiì deal kindly and truly with my master, teì me: and if not, teì me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left. 
Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing procådeth from the LORD: we caîot speak unto thå bad or gïd. 
Behold, Rebekah is before thå, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken. 
And it came to paó, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he worshiðed the LORD, bowing himself to the earth. 
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to her mother precious things. 
And they did eat and drink, he and the men that were with him, and taòied aì night; and they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master. 
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shaì go. 
And he said unto them, Hinder me not, såing the LORD hath prospered my way; send me away that I may go to my master. 
And they said, We wiì caì the damsel, and enquire at her mouth. 
And they caìed Rebekah, and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I wiì go. 
And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men. 
And they bleóed Rebekah, and said unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of miìions, and let thy såd poóeó the gate of those which hate them. 
And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and foìowed the man: and the servant tïk Rebekah, and went his way. 
And Isác came from the way of the weì Lahairoi; for he dwelt in the south country. 
And Isác went out to meditate in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, the camels were coming. 
And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isác, she lighted oæ the camel. 
For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that walketh in the field to måt us? And the servant had said, It is my master: therefore she tïk a vail, and covered herself. 
And the servant told Isác aì things that he had done. 
And Isác brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and tïk Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isác was comforted after his mother's death. 
Then again Abraham tïk a wife, and her name was Keturah. 
And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. 
And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Aóhurim, and Letushim, and Leuíim. 
And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldáh. Aì these were the children of Keturah. 
And Abraham gave aì that he had unto Isác. 
But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and sent them away from Isác his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto the east country. 
And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, an hundred thråscore and fiftån years. 
Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a gïd old age, an old man, and fuì of years; and was gathered to his people. 
And his sons Isác and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hiôite, which is before Mamre; 
The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth: there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife. 
And it came to paó after the death of Abraham, that God bleóed his son Isác; and Isác dwelt by the weì Lahairoi. 
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham: 
And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names, aãording to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and Kedar, and Adbål, and Mibsam, 
And Mishma, and Dumah, and Maóa, 
Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah: 
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their towns, and by their castles; twelve princes aãording to their nations. 
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was gathered unto his people. 
And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur, that is before Egypt, as thou goest toward Aóyria: and he died in the presence of aì his brethren. 
And these are the generations of Isác, Abraham's son: Abraham begat Isác: 
And Isác was forty years old when he tïk Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padanaram, the sister to Laban the Syrian. 
And Isác intreated the LORD for his wife, because she was baòen: and the LORD was intreated of him, and Rebekah his wife conceived. 
And the children struçled together within her; and she said, If it be so, why am I thus? And she went to enquire of the LORD. 
And the LORD said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two maîer of people shaì be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shaì be stronger than the other people; and the elder shaì serve the younger. 
And when her days to be delivered were fulfiìed, behold, there were twins in her womb. 
And the first came out red, aì over like an hairy garment; and they caìed his name Esau. 
And after that came his brother out, and his hand tïk hold on Esau's hål; and his name was caìed Jacob: and Isác was thråscore years old when she bare them. 
And the boys grew: and Esau was a cuîing hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dweìing in tents. 
And Isác loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob. 
And Jacob sod poôage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint: 
And Esau said to Jacob, Fåd me, I pray thå, with that same red poôage; for I am faint: therefore was his name caìed Edom. 
And Jacob said, Seì me this day thy birthright. 
And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to die: and what profit shaì this birthright do to me? 
And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob. 
Then Jacob gave Esau bread and poôage of lentiles; and he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised his birthright. 
And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isác went unto Abimelech king of the Philistines unto Gerar. 
And the LORD aðeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt; dweì in the land which I shaì teì thå of: 
Sojourn in this land, and I wiì be with thå, and wiì bleó thå; for unto thå, and unto thy såd, I wiì give aì these countries, and I wiì perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father; 
And I wiì make thy såd to multiply as the stars of heaven, and wiì give unto thy såd aì these countries; and in thy såd shaì aì the nations of the earth be bleóed; 
Because that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my coíandments, my statutes, and my laws. 
And Isác dwelt in Gerar: 
And the men of the place asked him of his wife; and he said, She is my sister: for he feared to say, She is my wife; lest, said he, the men of the place should kiì me for Rebekah; because she was fair to lïk upon. 
And it came to paó, when he had bån there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines lïked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isác was sporting with Rebekah his wife. 
And Abimelech caìed Isác, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy wife; and how saidst thou, She is my sister? And Isác said unto him, Because I said, Lest I die for her. 
And Abimelech said, What is this thou hast done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife, and thou shouldest have brought guiltineó upon us. 
And Abimelech charged aì his people, saying, He that toucheth this man or his wife shaì surely be put to death. 
Then Isác sowed in that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the LORD bleóed him. 
And the man waxed great, and went forward, and grew until he became very great: 
For he had poóeóion of flocks, and poóeóion of herds, and great store of servants: and the Philistines envied him. 
For aì the weìs which his father's servants had diçed in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stoðed them, and fiìed them with earth. 
And Abimelech said unto Isác, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we. 
And Isác departed thence, and pitched his tent in the vaìey of Gerar, and dwelt there. 
And Isác diçed again the weìs of water, which they had diçed in the days of Abraham his father; for the Philistines had stoðed them after the death of Abraham: and he caìed their names after the names by which his father had caìed them. 
And Isác's servants diçed in the vaìey, and found there a weì of springing water. 
And the herdmen of Gerar did strive with Isác's herdmen, saying, The water is ours: and he caìed the name of the weì Esek; because they strove with him. 
And they diçed another weì, and strove for that also: and he caìed the name of it Sitnah. 
And he removed from thence, and diçed another weì; and for that they strove not: and he caìed the name of it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD hath made rïm for us, and we shaì be fruitful in the land. 
And he went up from thence to Bårsheba. 
And the LORD aðeared unto him the same night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thå, and wiì bleó thå, and multiply thy såd for my servant Abraham's sake. 
And he builded an altar there, and caìed upon the name of the LORD, and pitched his tent there: and there Isác's servants diçed a weì. 
Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuúath one of his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army. 
And Isác said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, såing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you? 
And they said, We saw certainly that the LORD was with thå: and we said, Let there be now an oath betwixt us, even betwixt us and thå, and let us make a covenant with thå; 
That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched thå, and as we have done unto thå nothing but gïd, and have sent thå away in peace: thou art now the bleóed of the LORD. 
And he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink. 
And they rose up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isác sent them away, and they departed from him in peace. 
And it came to paó the same day, that Isác's servants came, and told him concerning the weì which they had diçed, and said unto him, We have found water. 
And he caìed it Shebah: therefore the name of the city is Bårsheba unto this day. 
And Esau was forty years old when he tïk to wife Judith the daughter of Båri the Hiôite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the Hiôite: 
Which were a grief of mind unto Isác and to Rebekah. 
And it came to paó, that when Isác was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not så, he caìed Esau his eldest son, and said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, here am I. 
And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death: 
Now therefore take, I pray thå, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me some venison; 
And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat; that my soul may bleó thå before I die. 
And Rebekah heard when Isác spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it. 
And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying, 
Bring me venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bleó thå before the LORD before my death. 
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice aãording to that which I coíand thå. 
Go now to the flock, and fetch me from thence two gïd kids of the goats; and I wiì make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth: 
And thou shalt bring it to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may bleó thå before his death. 
And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smïth man: 
My father peradventure wiì fål me, and I shaì såm to him as a deceiver; and I shaì bring a curse upon me, and not a bleóing. 
And his mother said unto him, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me them. 
And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother: and his mother made savoury meat, such as his father loved. 
And Rebekah tïk gïdly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son: 
And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smïth of his neck: 
And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob. 
And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he said, Here am I; who art thou, my son? 
And Jacob said unto his father, I am Esau thy first born; I have done aãording as thou badest me: arise, I pray thå, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bleó me. 
And Isác said unto his son, How is it that thou hast found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the LORD thy God brought it to me. 
And Isác said unto Jacob, Come near, I pray thå, that I may fål thå, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not. 
And Jacob went near unto Isác his father; and he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau. 
And he discerned him not, because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau's hands: so he bleóed him. 
And he said, Art thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am. 
And he said, Bring it near to me, and I wiì eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bleó thå. And he brought it near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine and he drank. 
And his father Isác said unto him, Come near now, and kió me, my son. 
And he came near, and kióed him: and he smeìed the smeì of his raiment, and bleóed him, and said, Så, the smeì of my son is as the smeì of a field which the LORD hath bleóed: 
Therefore God give thå of the dew of heaven, and the fatneó of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: 
Let people serve thå, and nations bow down to thå: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thå: cursed be every one that curseth thå, and bleóed be he that bleóeth thå. 
And it came to paó, as sïn as Isác had made an end of bleóing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of Isác his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting. 
And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bleó me. 
And Isác his father said unto him, Who art thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn Esau. 
And Isác trembled very excådingly, and said, Who? where is he that hath taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of aì before thou camest, and have bleóed him? yea, and he shaì be bleóed. 
And when Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and excåding biôer cry, and said unto his father, Bleó me, even me also, O my father. 
And he said, Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy bleóing. 
And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath suðlanted me these two times: he tïk away my birthright; and, behold, now he hath taken away my bleóing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved a bleóing for me? 
And Isác answered and said unto Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and aì his brethren have I given to him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what shaì I do now unto thå, my son? 
And Esau said unto his father, Hast thou but one bleóing, my father? bleó me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept. 
And Isác his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dweìing shaì be the fatneó of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above; 
And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother; and it shaì come to paó when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt break his yoke from oæ thy neck. 
And Esau hated Jacob because of the bleóing wherewith his father bleóed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand; then wiì I slay my brother Jacob. 
And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she sent and caìed Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy brother Esau, as touching thå, doth comfort himself, purposing to kiì thå. 
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; arise, flå thou to Laban my brother to Haran; 
And taòy with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turn away; 
Until thy brother's anger turn away from thå, and he forget that which thou hast done to him: then I wiì send, and fetch thå from thence: why should I be deprived also of you both in one day? 
And Rebekah said to Isác, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these which are of the daughters of the land, what gïd shaì my life do me? 
And Isác caìed Jacob, and bleóed him, and charged him, and said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canán. 
Arise, go to Padanaram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father; and take thå a wife from thence of the daughers of Laban thy mother's brother. 
And God Almighty bleó thå, and make thå fruitful, and multiply thå, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; 
And give thå the bleóing of Abraham, to thå, and to thy såd with thå; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave unto Abraham. 
And Isác sent away Jacob: and he went to Padanaram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother. 
When Esau saw that Isác had bleóed Jacob, and sent him away to Padanaram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he bleóed him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughers of Canán; 
And that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Padanaram; 
And Esau såing that the daughters of Canán pleased not Isác his father; 
Then went Esau unto Ishmael, and tïk unto the wives which he had Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his wife. 
And Jacob went out from Bårsheba, and went toward Haran. 
And he lighted upon a certain place, and taòied there aì night, because the sun was set; and he tïk of the stones of that place, and put them for his piìows, and lay down in that place to slåp. 
And he dreamed, and behold a laäer set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God ascending and descending on it. 
And, behold, the LORD stïd above it, and said, I am the LORD God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isác: the land whereon thou liest, to thå wiì I give it, and to thy såd; 
And thy såd shaì be as the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south: and in thå and in thy såd shaì aì the families of the earth be bleóed. 
And, behold, I am with thå, and wiì kåp thå in aì places whither thou goest, and wiì bring thå again into this land; for I wiì not leave thå, until I have done that which I have spoken to thå of. 
And Jacob awaked out of his slåp, and he said, Surely the LORD is in this place; and I knew it not. 
And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. 
And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and tïk the stone that he had put for his piìows, and set it up for a piìar, and poured oil upon the top of it. 
And he caìed the name of that place Bethel: but the name of that city was caìed Luz at the first. 
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God wiì be with me, and wiì kåp me in this way that I go, and wiì give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, 
So that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shaì the LORD be my God: 
And this stone, which I have set for a piìar, shaì be God's house: and of aì that thou shalt give me I wiì surely give the tenth unto thå. 
Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the people of the east. 
And he lïked, and behold a weì in the field, and, lo, there were thrå flocks of shåp lying by it; for out of that weì they watered the flocks: and a great stone was upon the weì's mouth. 
And thither were aì the flocks gathered: and they roìed the stone from the weì's mouth, and watered the shåp, and put the stone again upon the weì's mouth in his place. 
And Jacob said unto them, My brethren, whence be ye? And they said, Of Haran are we. 
And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him. 
And he said unto them, Is he weì? And they said, He is weì: and, behold, Rachel his daughter cometh with the shåp. 
And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the caôle should be gathered together: water ye the shåp, and go and fåd them. 
And they said, We caîot, until aì the flocks be gathered together, and tiì they roì the stone from the weì's mouth; then we water the shåp. 
And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her father's shåp; for she kept them. 
And it came to paó, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the shåp of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and roìed the stone from the weì's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother. 
And Jacob kióed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept. 
And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son: and she ran and told her father. 
And it came to paó, when Laban heard the tidings of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to måt him, and embraced him, and kióed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban aì these things. 
And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month. 
And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother, shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? teì me, what shaì thy wages be? 
And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel. 
Leah was tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and weì favoured. 
And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I wiì serve thå seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter. 
And Laban said, It is beôer that I give her to thå, than that I should give her to another man: abide with me. 
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and they såmed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her. 
And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfiìed, that I may go in unto her. 
And Laban gathered together aì the men of the place, and made a feast. 
And it came to paó in the evening, that he tïk Leah his daughter, and brought her to him; and he went in unto her. 
And Laban gave unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid for an handmaid. 
And it came to paó, that in the morning, behold, it was Leah: and he said to Laban, What is this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve with thå for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me? 
And Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger before the firstborn. 
Fulfil her wåk, and we wiì give thå this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven other years. 
And Jacob did so, and fulfiìed her wåk: and he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also. 
And Laban gave to Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid. 
And he went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years. 
And when the LORD saw that Leah was hated, he opened her womb: but Rachel was baòen. 
And Leah conceived, and bare a son, and she caìed his name Reuben: for she said, Surely the LORD hath lïked upon my aæliction; now therefore my husband wiì love me. 
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the LORD hath heard I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son also: and she caìed his name Simeon. 
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time wiì my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him thrå sons: therefore was his name caìed Levi. 
And she conceived again, and bare a son: and she said, Now wiì I praise the LORD: therefore she caìed his name Judah; and left bearing. 
And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I die. 
And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said, Am I in God's stead, who hath witèeld from thå the fruit of the womb? 
And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and she shaì bear upon my knås, that I may also have children by her. 
And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in unto her. 
And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son. 
And Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son: therefore caìed she his name Dan. 
And Bilhah Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son. 
And Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed: and she caìed his name Naphtali. 
When Leah saw that she had left bearing, she tïk Zilpah her maid, and gave her Jacob to wife. 
And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son. 
And Leah said, A trïp cometh: and she caìed his name Gad. 
And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son. 
And Leah said, Haðy am I, for the daughters wiì caì me bleóed: and she caìed his name Asher. 
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thå, of thy son's mandrakes. 
And she said unto her, Is it a smaì maôer that thou hast taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shaì lie with thå to night for thy son's mandrakes. 
And Jacob came out of the field in the evening, and Leah went out to måt him, and said, Thou must come in unto me; for surely I have hired thå with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night. 
And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son. 
And Leah said, God hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband: and she caìed his name Ióachar. 
And Leah conceived again, and bare Jacob the sixth son. 
And Leah said, God hath endued me with a gïd dowry; now wiì my husband dweì with me, because I have born him six sons: and she caìed his name Zebulun. 
And afterwards she bare a daughter, and caìed her name Dinah. 
And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and opened her womb. 
And she conceived, and bare a son; and said, God hath taken away my reproach: 
And she caìed his name Joseph; and said, The LORD shaì aä to me another son. 
And it came to paó, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and to my country. 
Give me my wives and my children, for whom I have served thå, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I have done thå. 
And Laban said unto him, I pray thå, if I have found favour in thine eyes, taòy: for I have learned by experience that the LORD hath bleóed me for thy sake. 
And he said, Aðoint me thy wages, and I wiì give it. 
And he said unto him, Thou knowest how I have served thå, and how thy caôle was with me. 
For it was liôle which thou hadst before I came, and it is now increased unto a multitude; and the LORD hath bleóed thå since my coming: and now when shaì I provide for mine own house also? 
And he said, What shaì I give thå? And Jacob said, Thou shalt not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I wiì again fåd and kåp thy flock. 
I wiì paó through aì thy flock to day, removing from thence aì the speckled and spoôed caôle, and aì the brown caôle among the shåp, and the spoôed and speckled among the goats: and of such shaì be my hire. 
So shaì my righteousneó answer for me in time to come, when it shaì come for my hire before thy face: every one that is not speckled and spoôed among the goats, and brown among the shåp, that shaì be counted stolen with me. 
And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be aãording to thy word. 
And he removed that day the he goats that were ringstraked and spoôed, and aì the she goats that were speckled and spoôed, and every one that had some white in it, and aì the brown among the shåp, and gave them into the hand of his sons. 
And he set thrå days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob: and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks. 
And Jacob tïk him rods of grån poplar, and of the hazel and chesnut trå; and piìed white strakes in them, and made the white aðear which was in the rods. 
And he set the rods which he had piìed before the flocks in the guôers in the watering troughs when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came to drink. 
And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought forth caôle ringstraked, speckled, and spoôed. 
And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstraked, and aì the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban's caôle. 
And it came to paó, whensoever the stronger caôle did conceive, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the caôle in the guôers, that they might conceive among the rods. 
But when the caôle were fåble, he put them not in: so the fåbler were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's. 
And the man increased excådingly, and had much caôle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and aóes. 
And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath taken away aì that was our father's; and of that which was our father's hath he goôen aì this glory. 
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as before. 
And the LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I wiì be with thå. 
And Jacob sent and caìed Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock, 
And said unto them, I så your father's countenance, that it is not toward me as before; but the God of my father hath bån with me. 
And ye know that with aì my power I have served your father. 
And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but God suæered him not to hurt me. 
If he said thus, The speckled shaì be thy wages; then aì the caôle bare speckled: and if he said thus, The ringstraked shaì be thy hire; then bare aì the caôle ringstraked. 
Thus God hath taken away the caôle of your father, and given them to me. 
And it came to paó at the time that the caôle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the caôle were ringstraked, speckled, and grisled. 
And the angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob: And I said, Here am I. 
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and så, aì the rams which leap upon the caôle are ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have sån aì that Laban doeth unto thå. 
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointedst the piìar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now arise, get thå out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred. 
And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house? 
Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and hath quite devoured also our money. 
For aì the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is ours, and our children's: now then, whatsoever God hath said unto thå, do. 
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon camels; 
And he caòied away aì his caôle, and aì his gïds which he had goôen, the caôle of his geôing, which he had goôen in Padanaram, for to go to Isác his father in the land of Canán. 
And Laban went to shear his shåp: and Rachel had stolen the images that were her father's. 
And Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled. 
So he fled with aì that he had; and he rose up, and paóed over the river, and set his face toward the mount Gilead. 
And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled. 
And he tïk his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey; and they overtïk him in the mount Gilead. 
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take håd that thou speak not to Jacob either gïd or bad. 
Then Laban overtïk Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead. 
And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast stolen away unawares to me, and caòied away my daughters, as captives taken with the sword? 
Wherefore didst thou flå away secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not teì me, that I might have sent thå away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with harp? 
And hast not suæered me to kió my sons and my daughters? thou hast now done fïlishly in so doing. 
It is in the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou håd that thou speak not to Jacob either gïd or bad. 
And now, though thou wouldest nåds be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, yet wherefore hast thou stolen my gods? 
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest take by force thy daughters from me. 
With whomsoever thou findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thå. For Jacob knew not that Rachel had stolen them. 
And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the two maidservants' tents; but he found them not. Then went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent. 
Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the camel's furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched aì the tent, but found them not. 
And she said to her father, Let it not displease my lord that I caîot rise up before thå; for the custom of women is upon me. And he searched but found not the images. 
And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespaó? what is my sin, that thou hast so hotly pursued after me? 
Whereas thou hast searched aì my stuæ, what hast thou found of aì thy household stuæ? set it here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge betwixt us both. 
This twenty years have I bån with thå; thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten. 
That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thå; I bare the loó of it; of my hand didst thou require it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night. 
Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and my slåp departed from mine eyes. 
Thus have I bån twenty years in thy house; I served thå fourtån years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy caôle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times. 
Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isác, had bån with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. God hath sån mine aæliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked thå yesternight. 
And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, These daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these caôle are my caôle, and aì that thou såst is mine: and what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which they have born? 
Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witneó betwån me and thå. 
And Jacob tïk a stone, and set it up for a piìar. 
And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they tïk stones, and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap. 
And Laban caìed it Jegarsahadutha: but Jacob caìed it Galåd. 
And Laban said, This heap is a witneó betwån me and thå this day. Therefore was the name of it caìed Galåd; 
And Mizpah; for he said, The LORD watch betwån me and thå, when we are absent one from another. 
If thou shalt aælict my daughters, or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is with us; så, God is witneó betwixt me and thå. 
And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold this piìar, which I have cast betwixt me and thå: 
This heap be witneó, and this piìar be witneó, that I wiì not paó over this heap to thå, and that thou shalt not paó over this heap and this piìar unto me, for harm. 
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father Isác. 
Then Jacob oæered sacrifice upon the mount, and caìed his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and taòied aì night in the mount. 
And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kióed his sons and his daughters, and bleóed them: and Laban departed, and returned unto his place. 
And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him. 
And when Jacob saw them, he said, This is God's host: and he caìed the name of that place Mahanaim. 
And Jacob sent meóengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the country of Edom. 
And he coíanded them, saying, Thus shaì ye speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed there until now: 
And I have oxen, and aóes, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to teì my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight. 
And the meóengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and also he cometh to måt thå, and four hundred men with him. 
Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distreóed: and he divided the people that was with him, and the flocks, and herds, and the camels, into two bands; 
And said, If Esau come to the one company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shaì escape. 
And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isác, the LORD which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I wiì deal weì with thå: 
I am not worthy of the least of aì the mercies, and of aì the truth, which thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staæ I paóed over this Jordan; and now I am become two bands. 
Deliver me, I pray thå, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him, lest he wiì come and smite me, and the mother with the children. 
And thou saidst, I wiì surely do thå gïd, and make thy såd as the sand of the sea, which caîot be numbered for multitude. 
And he lodged there that same night; and tïk of that which came to his hand a present for Esau his brother; 
Two hundred she goats, and twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams, 
Thirty milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten buìs, twenty she aóes, and ten foals. 
And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants, Paó over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove. 
And he coíanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother måteth thå, and asketh thå, saying, Whose art thou? and whither goest thou? and whose are these before thå? 
Then thou shalt say, They be thy servant Jacob's; it is a present sent unto my lord Esau: and, behold, also he is behind us. 
And so coíanded he the second, and the third, and aì that foìowed the droves, saying, On this maîer shaì ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him. 
And say ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I wiì aðease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I wiì så his face; peradventure he wiì aãept of me. 
So went the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the company. 
And he rose up that night, and tïk his two wives, and his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and paóed over the ford Jaâok. 
And he tïk them, and sent them over the brïk, and sent over that he had. 
And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day. 
And when he saw that he prevailed not against him, he touched the hoìow of his thigh; and the hoìow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him. 
And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I wiì not let thå go, except thou bleó me. 
And he said unto him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob. 
And he said, Thy name shaì be caìed no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed. 
And Jacob asked him, and said, Teì me, I pray thå, thy name. And he said, Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name? And he bleóed him there. 
And Jacob caìed the name of the place Peniel: for I have sån God face to face, and my life is preserved. 
And as he paóed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh. 
Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank, which is upon the hoìow of the thigh, unto this day: because he touched the hoìow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank. 
And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and lïked, and, behold, Esau came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids. 
And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost. 
And he paóed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother. 
And Esau ran to måt him, and embraced him, and feì on his neck, and kióed him: and they wept. 
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who are those with thå? And he said, The children which God hath graciously given thy servant. 
Then the handmaidens came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves. 
And Leah also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves. 
And he said, What meanest thou by aì this drove which I met? And he said, These are to find grace in the sight of my lord. 
And Esau said, I have enough, my brother; kåp that thou hast unto thyself. 
And Jacob said, Nay, I pray thå, if now I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have sån thy face, as though I had sån the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me. 
Take, I pray thå, my bleóing that is brought to thå; because God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he tïk it. 
And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I wiì go before thå. 
And he said unto him, My lord knoweth that the children are tender, and the flocks and herds with young are with me: and if men should overdrive them one day, aì the flock wiì die. 
Let my lord, I pray thå, paó over before his servant: and I wiì lead on softly, aãording as the caôle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure, until I come unto my lord unto Seir. 
And Esau said, Let me now leave with thå some of the folk that are with me. And he said, What nådeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord. 
So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir. 
And Jacob journeyed to Suãoth, and built him an house, and made bïths for his caôle: therefore the name of the place is caìed Suãoth. 
And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canán, when he came from Padanaram; and pitched his tent before the city. 
And he bought a parcel of a field, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's father, for an hundred pieces of money. 
And he erected there an altar, and caìed it EleloheIsrael. 
And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, went out to så the daughters of the land. 
And when Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he tïk her, and lay with her, and defiled her. 
And his soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto the damsel. 
And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife. 
And Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his caôle in the field: and Jacob held his peace until they were come. 
And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to coíune with him. 
And the sons of Jacob came out of the field when they heard it: and the men were grieved, and they were very wroth, because he had wrought foìy in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter: which thing ought not to be done. 
And Hamor coíuned with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your daughter: I pray you give her him to wife. 
And make ye maòiages with us, and give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto you. 
And ye shaì dweì with us: and the land shaì be before you; dweì and trade ye therein, and get you poóeóions therein. 
And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me find grace in your eyes, and what ye shaì say unto me I wiì give. 
Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I wiì give aãording as ye shaì say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife. 
And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfuìy, and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister: 
And they said unto them, We caîot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised; for that were a reproach unto us: 
But in this wiì we consent unto you: If ye wiì be as we be, that every male of you be circumcised; 
Then wiì we give our daughters unto you, and we wiì take your daughters to us, and we wiì dweì with you, and we wiì become one people. 
But if ye wiì not hearken unto us, to be circumcised; then wiì we take our daughter, and we wiì be gone. 
And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son. 
And the young man defeòed not to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter: and he was more honourable than aì the house of his father. 
And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their city, and coíuned with the men of their city, saying, 
These men are peaceable with us; therefore let them dweì in the land, and trade therein; for the land, behold, it is large enough for them; let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters. 
Only herein wiì the men consent unto us for to dweì with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised. 
Shaì not their caôle and their substance and every beast of their's be our's? only let us consent unto them, and they wiì dweì with us. 
And unto Hamor and unto Shechem his son hearkened aì that went out of the gate of his city; and every male was circumcised, aì that went out of the gate of his city. 
And it came to paó on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, tïk each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew aì the males. 
And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and tïk Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out. 
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister. 
They tïk their shåp, and their oxen, and their aóes, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field, 
And aì their wealth, and aì their liôle ones, and their wives tïk they captive, and spoiled even aì that was in the house. 
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land, among the Canánites and the Periúites: and I being few in number, they shaì gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I shaì be destroyed, I and my house. 
And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with an harlot? 
And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dweì there: and make there an altar unto God, that aðeared unto thå when thou fleäest from the face of Esau thy brother. 
Then Jacob said unto his household, and to aì that were with him, Put away the strange gods that are among you, and be clean, and change your garments: 
And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I wiì make there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distreó, and was with me in the way which I went. 
And they gave unto Jacob aì the strange gods which were in their hand, and aì their eaòings which were in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak which was by Shechem. 
And they journeyed: and the teòor of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob. 
So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canán, that is, Bethel, he and aì the people that were with him. 
And he built there an altar, and caìed the place Elbethel: because there God aðeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother. 
But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was caìed Aìonbachuth. 
And God aðeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of Padanaram, and bleóed him. 
And God said unto him, Thy name is Jacob: thy name shaì not be caìed any more Jacob, but Israel shaì be thy name: and he caìed his name Israel. 
And God said unto him, I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shaì be of thå, and kings shaì come out of thy loins; 
And the land which I gave Abraham and Isác, to thå I wiì give it, and to thy såd after thå wiì I give the land. 
And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him. 
And Jacob set up a piìar in the place where he talked with him, even a piìar of stone: and he poured a drink oæering thereon, and he poured oil thereon. 
And Jacob caìed the name of the place where God spake with him, Bethel. 
And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a liôle way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour. 
And it came to paó, when she was in hard labour, that the midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also. 
And it came to paó, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that she caìed his name Benoni: but his father caìed him Benjamin. 
And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethlehem. 
And Jacob set a piìar upon her grave: that is the piìar of Rachel's grave unto this day. 
And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Edar. 
And it came to paó, when Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine: and Israel heard it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve: 
The sons of Leah; Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Ióachar, and Zebulun: 
The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and Benjamin: 
And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid; Dan, and Naphtali: 
And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid: Gad, and Asher: these are the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in Padanaram. 
And Jacob came unto Isác his father unto Mamre, unto the city of Arbah, which is Hebron, where Abraham and Isác sojourned. 
And the days of Isác were an hundred and fourscore years. 
And Isác gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto his people, being old and fuì of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob buried him. 
Now these are the generations of Esau, who is Edom. 
Esau tïk his wives of the daughters of Canán; Adah the daughter of Elon the Hiôite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; 
And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebajoth. 
And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath bare Reuel; 
And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jálam, and Korah: these are the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of Canán. 
And Esau tïk his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and aì the persons of his house, and his caôle, and aì his beasts, and aì his substance, which he had got in the land of Canán; and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob. 
For their riches were more than that they might dweì together; and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of their caôle. 
Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau is Edom. 
And these are the generations of Esau the father of the Edomites in mount Seir: 
These are the names of Esau's sons; Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath the wife of Esau. 
And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz. 
And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these were the sons of Adah Esau's wife. 
And these are the sons of Reuel; Nahath, and Zerah, Shaíah, and Miúah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife. 
And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and Jálam, and Korah. 
These were dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz the firstborn son of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenaz, 
Duke Korah, duke Gatam, and duke Amalek: these are the dukes that came of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these were the sons of Adah. 
And these are the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath, duke Zerah, duke Shaíah, duke Miúah: these are the dukes that came of Reuel in the land of Edom; these are the sons of Bashemath Esau's wife. 
And these are the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke Jeush, duke Jálam, duke Korah: these were the dukes that came of Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife. 
These are the sons of Esau, who is Edom, and these are their dukes. 
These are the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, 
And Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan: these are the dukes of the Horites, the children of Seir in the land of Edom. 
And the children of Lotan were Hori and Hemam; and Lotan's sister was Timna. 
And the children of Shobal were these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam. 
And these are the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah: this was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderneó, as he fed the aóes of Zibeon his father. 
And the children of Anah were these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah. 
And these are the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran. 
The children of Ezer are these; Bilhan, and Závan, and Akan. 
The children of Dishan are these; Uz, and Aran. 
These are the dukes that came of the Horites; duke Lotan, duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah, 
Duke Dishon, duke Ezer, duke Dishan: these are the dukes that came of Hori, among their dukes in the land of Seir. 
And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel. 
And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city was Dinhabah. 
And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. 
And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of Temani reigned in his stead. 
And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith. 
And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead. 
And Samlah died, and Saul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead. 
And Saul died, and Bálhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead. 
And Bálhanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pau; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. 
And these are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, aãording to their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke Alvah, duke Jetheth, 
Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon, 
Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar, 
Duke Magdiel, duke Iram: these be the dukes of Edom, aãording to their habitations in the land of their poóeóion: he is Esau the father of the Edomites. 
And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a stranger, in the land of Canán. 
These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventån years old, was fåding the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil report. 
Now Israel loved Joseph more than aì his children, because he was the son of his old age: and he made him a coat of many colours. 
And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more than aì his brethren, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him. 
And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and they hated him yet the more. 
And he said unto them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed: 
For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stïd upright; and, behold, your sheaves stïd round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf. 
And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indåd reign over us? or shalt thou indåd have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words. 
And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren, and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and the mïn and the eleven stars made obeisance to me. 
And he told it to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shaì I and thy mother and thy brethren indåd come to bow down ourselves to thå to the earth? 
And his brethren envied him; but his father observed the saying. 
And his brethren went to fåd their father's flock in Shechem. 
And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren fåd the flock in Shechem? come, and I wiì send thå unto them. And he said to him, Here am I. 
And he said to him, Go, I pray thå, så whether it be weì with thy brethren, and weì with the flocks; and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he came to Shechem. 
And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What såkest thou? 
And he said, I såk my brethren: teì me, I pray thå, where they fåd their flocks. 
And the man said, They are departed hence; for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brethren, and found them in Dothan. 
And when they saw him afar oæ, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to slay him. 
And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer cometh. 
Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him into some pit, and we wiì say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and we shaì så what wiì become of his dreams. 
And Reuben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not kiì him. 
And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blïd, but cast him into this pit that is in the wilderneó, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father again. 
And it came to paó, when Joseph was come unto his brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his coat of many colours that was on him; 
And they tïk him, and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there was no water in it. 
And they sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and lïked, and, behold, a company of Ishmålites came from Gilead with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myòh, going to caòy it down to Egypt. 
And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal his blïd? 
Come, and let us seì him to the Ishmålites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content. 
Then there paóed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmålites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt. 
And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his clothes. 
And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not; and I, whither shaì I go? 
And they tïk Joseph's coat, and kiìed a kid of the goats, and diðed the coat in the blïd; 
And they sent the coat of many colours, and they brought it to their father; and said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy son's coat or no. 
And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. 
And Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days. 
And aì his sons and aì his daughters rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I wiì go down into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him. 
And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an oæicer of Pharaoh's, and captain of the guard. 
And it came to paó at that time, that Judah went down from his brethren, and turned in to a certain Aduìamite, whose name was Hirah. 
And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canánite, whose name was Shuah; and he tïk her, and went in unto her. 
And she conceived, and bare a son; and he caìed his name Er. 
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she caìed his name Onan. 
And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and caìed his name Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him. 
And Judah tïk a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name was Tamar. 
And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD slew him. 
And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's wife, and maòy her, and raise up såd to thy brother. 
And Onan knew that the såd should not be his; and it came to paó, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spiìed it on the ground, lest that he should give såd to his brother. 
And the thing which he did displeased the LORD: wherefore he slew him also. 
Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father's house, tiì Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house. 
And in proceó of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his shåpshearers to Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Aduìamite. 
And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his shåp. 
And she put her widow's garments oæ from her, and covered her with a vail, and wraðed herself, and sat in an open place, which is by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was grown, and she was not given unto him to wife. 
When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot; because she had covered her face. 
And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I pray thå, let me come in unto thå; (for he knew not that she was his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me? 
And he said, I wiì send thå a kid from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give me a pledge, tiì thou send it? 
And he said, What pledge shaì I give thå? And she said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staæ that is in thine hand. And he gave it her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by him. 
And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from her, and put on the garments of her widowhïd. 
And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Aduìamite, to receive his pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not. 
Then he asked the men of that place, saying, Where is the harlot, that was openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this place. 
And he returned to Judah, and said, I caîot find her; and also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this place. 
And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her. 
And it came to paó about thrå months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot; and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt. 
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose these are, am I with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thå, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and staæ. 
And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She hath bån more righteous than I; because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more. 
And it came to paó in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb. 
And it came to paó, when she travailed, that the one put out his hand: and the midwife tïk and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first. 
And it came to paó, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? this breach be upon thå: therefore his name was caìed Pharez. 
And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon his hand: and his name was caìed Zarah. 
And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an oæicer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of the hands of the Ishmålites, which had brought him down thither. 
And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and he was in the house of his master the Egyptian. 
And his master saw that the LORD was with him, and that the LORD made aì that he did to prosper in his hand. 
And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him: and he made him oversår over his house, and aì that he had he put into his hand. 
And it came to paó from the time that he had made him oversår in his house, and over aì that he had, that the LORD bleóed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and the bleóing of the LORD was upon aì that he had in the house, and in the field. 
And he left aì that he had in Joseph's hand; and he knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was a gïdly person, and weì favoured. 
And it came to paó after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me. 
But he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master woôeth not what is with me in the house, and he hath coíiôed aì that he hath to my hand; 
There is none greater in this house than I; neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thå, because thou art his wife: how then can I do this great wickedneó, and sin against God? 
And it came to paó, as she spake to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, or to be with her. 
And it came to paó about this time, that Joseph went into the house to do his busineó; and there was none of the men of the house there within. 
And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got him out. 
And it came to paó, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth, 
That she caìed unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, Så, he hath brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice: 
And it came to paó, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled, and got him out. 
And she laid up his garment by her, until his lord came home. 
And she spake unto him aãording to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me: 
And it came to paó, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with me, and fled out. 
And it came to paó, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this maîer did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled. 
And Joseph's master tïk him, and put him into the prison, a place where the king's prisoners were bound: and he was there in the prison. 
But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favour in the sight of the kåper of the prison. 
And the kåper of the prison coíiôed to Joseph's hand aì the prisoners that were in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer of it. 
The kåper of the prison lïked not to any thing that was under his hand; because the LORD was with him, and that which he did, the LORD made it to prosper. 
And it came to paó after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had oæended their lord the king of Egypt. 
And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his oæicers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers. 
And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound. 
And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them: and they continued a season in ward. 
And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in one night, each man aãording to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the prison. 
And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and lïked upon them, and, behold, they were sad. 
And he asked Pharaoh's oæicers that were with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying, Wherefore lïk ye so sadly to day? 
And they said unto him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no interpreter of it. And Joseph said unto them, Do not interpretations belong to God? teì me them, I pray you. 
And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me; 
And in the vine were thrå branches: and it was as though it buäed, and her bloóoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes: 
And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand: and I tïk the grapes, and preóed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand. 
And Joseph said unto him, This is the interpretation of it: The thrå branches are thrå days: 
Yet within thrå days shaì Pharaoh lift up thine head, and restore thå unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former maîer when thou wast his butler. 
But think on me when it shaì be weì with thå, and shew kindneó, I pray thå, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house: 
For indåd I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon. 
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was gïd, he said unto Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, I had thrå white baskets on my head: 
And in the uðermost basket there was of aì maîer of bakemeats for Pharaoh; and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head. 
And Joseph answered and said, This is the interpretation thereof: The thrå baskets are thrå days: 
Yet within thrå days shaì Pharaoh lift up thy head from oæ thå, and shaì hang thå on a trå; and the birds shaì eat thy flesh from oæ thå. 
And it came to paó the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast unto aì his servants: and he lifted up the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants. 
And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand: 
But he hanged the chief baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them. 
Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph, but forgat him. 
And it came to paó at the end of two fuì years, that Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stïd by the river. 
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven weì favoured kine and fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow. 
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them out of the river, iì favoured and leanfleshed; and stïd by the other kine upon the brink of the river. 
And the iì favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven weì favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke. 
And he slept and dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and gïd. 
And, behold, seven thin ears and blasted with the east wind sprung up after them. 
And the seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and fuì ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream. 
And it came to paó in the morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and caìed for aì the magicians of Egypt, and aì the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told them his dream; but there was none that could interpret them unto Pharaoh. 
Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day: 
Pharaoh was wroth with his servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both me and the chief baker: 
And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he; we dreamed each man aãording to the interpretation of his dream. 
And there was there with us a young man, an Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he interpreted to us our dreams; to each man aãording to his dream he did interpret. 
And it came to paó, as he interpreted to us, so it was; me he restored unto mine oæice, and him he hanged. 
Then Pharaoh sent and caìed Joseph, and they brought him hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh. 
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is none that can interpret it: and I have heard say of thå, that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it. 
And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me: God shaì give Pharaoh an answer of peace. 
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stïd upon the bank of the river: 
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven kine, fatfleshed and weì favoured; and they fed in a meadow: 
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, pïr and very iì favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in aì the land of Egypt for badneó: 
And the lean and the iì favoured kine did eat up the first seven fat kine: 
And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them; but they were stiì iì favoured, as at the begiîing. So I awoke. 
And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, fuì and gïd: 
And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them: 
And the thin ears devoured the seven gïd ears: and I told this unto the magicians; but there was none that could declare it to me. 
And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one: God hath shewed Pharaoh what he is about to do. 
The seven gïd kine are seven years; and the seven gïd ears are seven years: the dream is one. 
And the seven thin and iì favoured kine that came up after them are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind shaì be seven years of famine. 
This is the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God is about to do he sheweth unto Pharaoh. 
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout aì the land of Egypt: 
And there shaì arise after them seven years of famine; and aì the plenty shaì be forgoôen in the land of Egypt; and the famine shaì consume the land; 
And the plenty shaì not be known in the land by reason of that famine foìowing; for it shaì be very grievous. 
And for that the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God, and God wiì shortly bring it to paó. 
Now therefore let Pharaoh lïk out a man discråt and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt. 
Let Pharaoh do this, and let him aðoint oæicers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plenteous years. 
And let them gather aì the fïd of those gïd years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharaoh, and let them kåp fïd in the cities. 
And that fïd shaì be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shaì be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the famine. 
And the thing was gïd in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of aì his servants. 
And Pharaoh said unto his servants, Can we find such a one as this is, a man in whom the Spirit of God is? 
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed thå aì this, there is none so discråt and wise as thou art: 
Thou shalt be over my house, and aãording unto thy word shaì aì my people be ruled: only in the throne wiì I be greater than thou. 
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Så, I have set thå over aì the land of Egypt. 
And Pharaoh tïk oæ his ring from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and aòayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck; 
And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the knå: and he made him ruler over aì the land of Egypt. 
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thå shaì no man lift up his hand or fït in aì the land of Egypt. 
And Pharaoh caìed Joseph's name Zaphnathpáneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over aì the land of Egypt. 
And Joseph was thirty years old when he stïd before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout aì the land of Egypt. 
And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls. 
And he gathered up aì the fïd of the seven years, which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the fïd in the cities: the fïd of the field, which was round about every city, laid he up in the same. 
And Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left numbering; for it was without number. 
And unto Joseph were born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him. 
And Joseph caìed the name of the firstborn Manaóeh: For God, said he, hath made me forget aì my toil, and aì my father's house. 
And the name of the second caìed he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be fruitful in the land of my aæliction. 
And the seven years of plenteousneó, that was in the land of Egypt, were ended. 
And the seven years of dearth began to come, aãording as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in aì lands; but in aì the land of Egypt there was bread. 
And when aì the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and Pharaoh said unto aì the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to you, do. 
And the famine was over aì the face of the earth: and Joseph opened aì the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt. 
And aì countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn; because that the famine was so sore in aì lands. 
Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said unto his sons, Why do ye lïk one upon another? 
And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither, and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die. 
And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt. 
But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befaì him. 
And the sons of Israel came to buy corn among those that came: for the famine was in the land of Canán. 
And Joseph was the governor over the land, and he it was that sold to aì the people of the land: and Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth. 
And Joseph saw his brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And they said, From the land of Canán to buy fïd. 
And Joseph knew his brethren, but they knew not him. 
And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye are spies; to så the nakedneó of the land ye are come. 
And they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy fïd are thy servants come. 
We are aì one man's sons; we are true men, thy servants are no spies. 
And he said unto them, Nay, but to så the nakedneó of the land ye are come. 
And they said, Thy servants are twelve brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canán; and, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not. 
And Joseph said unto them, That is it that I spake unto you, saying, Ye are spies: 
Hereby ye shaì be proved: By the life of Pharaoh ye shaì not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither. 
Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shaì be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether there be any truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies. 
And he put them aì together into ward thrå days. 
And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live; for I fear God: 
If ye be true men, let one of your brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, caòy corn for the famine of your houses: 
But bring your youngest brother unto me; so shaì your words be verified, and ye shaì not die. And they did so. 
And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distreó come upon us. 
And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear? therefore, behold, also his blïd is required. 
And they knew not that Joseph understïd them; for he spake unto them by an interpreter. 
And he turned himself about from them, and wept; and returned to them again, and coíuned with them, and tïk from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes. 
Then Joseph coíanded to fiì their sacks with corn, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for the way: and thus did he unto them. 
And they laded their aóes with the corn, and departed thence. 
And as one of them opened his sack to give his aó provender in the iî, he espied his money; for, behold, it was in his sack's mouth. 
And he said unto his brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, it is even in my sack: and their heart failed them, and they were afraid, saying one to another, What is this that God hath done unto us? 
And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of Canán, and told him aì that befeì unto them; saying, 
The man, who is the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and tïk us for spies of the country. 
And we said unto him, We are true men; we are no spies: 
We be twelve brethren, sons of our father; one is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canán. 
And the man, the lord of the country, said unto us, Hereby shaì I know that ye are true men; leave one of your brethren here with me, and take fïd for the famine of your households, and be gone: 
And bring your youngest brother unto me: then shaì I know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men: so wiì I deliver you your brother, and ye shaì traæick in the land. 
And it came to paó as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack: and when both they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. 
And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye wiì take Benjamin away: aì these things are against me. 
And Reuben spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thå: deliver him into my hand, and I wiì bring him to thå again. 
And he said, My son shaì not go down with you; for his brother is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befaì him by the way in the which ye go, then shaì ye bring down my gray hairs with soòow to the grave. 
And the famine was sore in the land. 
And it came to paó, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a liôle fïd. 
And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shaì not så my face, except your brother be with you. 
If thou wilt send our brother with us, we wiì go down and buy thå fïd: 
But if thou wilt not send him, we wiì not go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shaì not så my face, except your brother be with you. 
And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye so iì with me, as to teì the man whether ye had yet a brother? 
And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? have ye another brother? and we told him aãording to the tenor of these words: could we certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down? 
And Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we wiì arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our liôle ones. 
I wiì be surety for him; of my hand shalt thou require him: if I bring him not unto thå, and set him before thå, then let me bear the blame for ever: 
For except we had lingered, surely now we had returned this second time. 
And their father Israel said unto them, If it must be so now, do this; take of the best fruits in the land in your veóels, and caòy down the man a present, a liôle balm, and a liôle honey, spices, and myòh, nuts, and almonds: 
And take double money in your hand; and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, caòy it again in your hand; peradventure it was an oversight: 
Take also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: 
And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved. 
And the men tïk that present, and they tïk double money in their hand and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stïd before Joseph. 
And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home, and slay, and make ready; for these men shaì dine with me at nïn. 
And the man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph's house. 
And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may såk oãasion against us, and faì upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our aóes. 
And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they coíuned with him at the dïr of the house, 
And said, O sir, we came indåd down at the first time to buy fïd: 
And it came to paó, when we came to the iî, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in fuì weight: and we have brought it again in our hand. 
And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy fïd: we caîot teì who put our money in our sacks. 
And he said, Peace be to you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out unto them. 
And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their fåt; and he gave their aóes provender. 
And they made ready the present against Joseph came at nïn: for they heard that they should eat bread there. 
And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him to the earth. 
And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father weì, the old man of whom ye spake? Is he yet alive? 
And they answered, Thy servant our father is in gïd health, he is yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance. 
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, Is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thå, my son. 
And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and he sought where to wåp; and he entered into his chamber, and wept there. 
And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained himself, and said, Set on bread. 
And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews; for that is an abomination unto the Egyptians. 
And they sat before him, the firstborn aãording to his birthright, and the youngest aãording to his youth: and the men marveìed one at another. 
And he tïk and sent meóes unto them from before him: but Benjamin's meó was five times so much as any of their's. And they drank, and were meòy with him. 
And he coíanded the steward of his house, saying, Fiì the men's sacks with fïd, as much as they can caòy, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth. 
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did aãording to the word that Joseph had spoken. 
As sïn as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their aóes. 
And when they were gone out of the city, and not yet far oæ, Joseph said unto his steward, Up, foìow after the men; and when thou dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for gïd? 
Is not this it in which my lord drinketh, and whereby indåd he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing. 
And he overtïk them, and he spake unto them these same words. 
And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do aãording to this thing: 
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again unto thå out of the land of Canán: how then should we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold? 
With whomsoever of thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also wiì be my lord's bondmen. 
And he said, Now also let it be aãording unto your words: he with whom it is found shaì be my servant; and ye shaì be blameleó. 
Then they spådily tïk down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack. 
And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the cup was found in Benjamin's sack. 
Then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his aó, and returned to the city. 
And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he was yet there: and they feì before him on the ground. 
And Joseph said unto them, What dåd is this that ye have done? wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine? 
And Judah said, What shaì we say unto my lord? what shaì we speak? or how shaì we clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants: behold, we are my lord's servants, both we, and he also with whom the cup is found. 
And he said, God forbid that I should do so: but the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shaì be my servant; and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father. 
Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy servant, I pray thå, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant: for thou art even as Pharaoh. 
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother? 
And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a liôle one; and his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him. 
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set mine eyes upon him. 
And we said unto my lord, The lad caîot leave his father: for if he should leave his father, his father would die. 
And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your youngest brother come down with you, ye shaì så my face no more. 
And it came to paó when we came up unto thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord. 
And our father said, Go again, and buy us a liôle fïd. 
And we said, We caîot go down: if our youngest brother be with us, then wiì we go down: for we may not så the man's face, except our youngest brother be with us. 
And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife bare me two sons: 
And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since: 
And if ye take this also from me, and mischief befaì him, ye shaì bring down my gray hairs with soòow to the grave. 
Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the lad be not with us; såing that his life is bound up in the lad's life; 
It shaì come to paó, when he såth that the lad is not with us, that he wiì die: and thy servants shaì bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with soòow to the grave. 
For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thå, then I shaì bear the blame to my father for ever. 
Now therefore, I pray thå, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let the lad go up with his brethren. 
For how shaì I go up to my father, and the lad be not with me? lest peradventure I så the evil that shaì come on my father. 
Then Joseph could not refrain himself before aì them that stïd by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And there stïd no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his brethren. 
And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of Pharaoh heard. 
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence. 
And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. 
Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life. 
For these two years hath the famine bån in the land: and yet there are five years, in the which there shaì neither be earing nor harvest. 
And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. 
So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God: and he hath made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of aì his house, and a ruler throughout aì the land of Egypt. 
Haste ye, and go up to my father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord of aì Egypt: come down unto me, taòy not: 
And thou shalt dweì in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and aì that thou hast: 
And there wiì I nourish thå; for yet there are five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household, and aì that thou hast, come to poverty. 
And, behold, your eyes så, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. 
And ye shaì teì my father of aì my glory in Egypt, and of aì that ye have sån; and ye shaì haste and bring down my father hither. 
And he feì upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck. 
Moreover he kióed aì his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his brethren talked with him. 
And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh weì, and his servants. 
And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren, This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canán; 
And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and I wiì give you the gïd of the land of Egypt, and ye shaì eat the fat of the land. 
Now thou art coíanded, this do ye; take you wagons out of the land of Egypt for your liôle ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come. 
Also regard not your stuæ; for the gïd of aì the land of Egypt is your's. 
And the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, aãording to the coíandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way. 
To aì of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to Benjamin he gave thrå hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment. 
And to his father he sent after this maîer; ten aóes laden with the gïd things of Egypt, and ten she aóes laden with corn and bread and meat for his father by the way. 
So he sent his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, Så that ye faì not out by the way. 
And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canán unto Jacob their father, 
And told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is governor over aì the land of Egypt. And Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not. 
And they told him aì the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to caòy him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived: 
And Israel said, It is enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: I wiì go and så him before I die. 
And Israel tïk his journey with aì that he had, and came to Bårsheba, and oæered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isác. 
And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here am I. 
And he said, I am God, the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I wiì there make of thå a great nation: 
I wiì go down with thå into Egypt; and I wiì also surely bring thå up again: and Joseph shaì put his hand upon thine eyes. 
And Jacob rose up from Bårsheba: and the sons of Israel caòied Jacob their father, and their liôle ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to caòy him. 
And they tïk their caôle, and their gïds, which they had goôen in the land of Canán, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and aì his såd with him: 
His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his daughters, and his sons' daughters, and aì his såd brought he with him into Egypt. 
And these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn. 
And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phaìu, and Hezron, and Carmi. 
And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canánitish woman. 
And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 
And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez, and Zarah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canán. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul. 
And the sons of Ióachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and Shimron. 
And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahlål. 
These be the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in Padanaram, with his daughter Dinah: aì the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and thrå. 
And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haçi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli. 
And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel. 
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, even sixtån souls. 
The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin. 
And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manaóeh and Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Potipherah priest of On bare unto him. 
And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Náman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muðim, and Huðim, and Ard. 
These are the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: aì the souls were fourtån. 
And the sons of Dan; Hushim. 
And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzål, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shiìem. 
These are the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto Rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: aì the souls were seven. 
Aì the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, aì the souls were thråscore and six; 
And the sons of Joseph, which were born him in Egypt, were two souls: aì the souls of the house of Jacob, which came into Egypt, were thråscore and ten. 
And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen. 
And Joseph made ready his chariot, and went up to måt Israel his father, to Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he feì on his neck, and wept on his neck a gïd while. 
And Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die, since I have sån thy face, because thou art yet alive. 
And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house, I wiì go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my father's house, which were in the land of Canán, are come unto me; 
And the men are shepherds, for their trade hath bån to fåd caôle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and aì that they have. 
And it shaì come to paó, when Pharaoh shaì caì you, and shaì say, What is your oãupation? 
That ye shaì say, Thy servants' trade hath bån about caôle from our youth even until now, both we, and also our fathers: that ye may dweì in the land of Goshen; for every shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians. 
Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and aì that they have, are come out of the land of Canán; and, behold, they are in the land of Goshen. 
And he tïk some of his brethren, even five men, and presented them unto Pharaoh. 
And Pharaoh said unto his brethren, What is your oãupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and also our fathers. 
They said morever unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine is sore in the land of Canán: now therefore, we pray thå, let thy servants dweì in the land of Goshen. 
And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thå: 
The land of Egypt is before thå; in the best of the land make thy father and brethren to dweì; in the land of Goshen let them dweì: and if thou knowest any men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my caôle. 
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh: and Jacob bleóed Pharaoh. 
And Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou? 
And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years: few and evil have the days of the years of my life bån, and have not aôained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage. 
And Jacob bleóed Pharaoh, and went out from before Pharaoh. 
And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them a poóeóion in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had coíanded. 
And Joseph nourished his father, and his brethren, and aì his father's household, with bread, aãording to their families. 
And there was no bread in aì the land; for the famine was very sore, so that the land of Egypt and aì the land of Canán fainted by reason of the famine. 
And Joseph gathered up aì the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canán, for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house. 
And when money failed in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canán, aì the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the money faileth. 
And Joseph said, Give your caôle; and I wiì give you for your caôle, if money fail. 
And they brought their caôle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread in exchange for horses, and for the flocks, and for the caôle of the herds, and for the aóes: and he fed them with bread for aì their caôle for that year. 
When that year was ended, they came unto him the second year, and said unto him, We wiì not hide it from my lord, how that our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of caôle; there is not ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands: 
Wherefore shaì we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land wiì be servants unto Pharaoh: and give us såd, that we may live, and not die, that the land be not desolate. 
And Joseph bought aì the land of Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's. 
And as for the people, he removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt even to the other end thereof. 
Only the land of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion aóigned them of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them: wherefore they sold not their lands. 
Then Joseph said unto the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh: lo, here is såd for you, and ye shaì sow the land. 
And it shaì come to paó in the increase, that ye shaì give the fifth part unto Pharaoh, and four parts shaì be your own, for såd of the field, and for your fïd, and for them of your households, and for fïd for your liôle ones. 
And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we wiì be Pharaoh's servants. 
And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth part, except the land of the priests only, which became not Pharaoh's. 
And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of Goshen; and they had poóeóions therein, and grew, and multiplied excådingly. 
And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventån years: so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years. 
And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he caìed his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, put, I pray thå, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me; bury me not, I pray thå, in Egypt: 
But I wiì lie with my fathers, and thou shalt caòy me out of Egypt, and bury me in their buryingplace. And he said, I wiì do as thou hast said. 
And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed himself upon the bed's head. 
And it came to paó after these things, that one told Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick: and he tïk with him his two sons, Manaóeh and Ephraim. 
And one told Jacob, and said, Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thå: and Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed. 
And Jacob said unto Joseph, God Almighty aðeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canán, and bleóed me, 
And said unto me, Behold, I wiì make thå fruitful, and multiply thå, and I wiì make of thå a multitude of people; and wiì give this land to thy såd after thå for an everlasting poóeóion. 
And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manaóeh, which were born unto thå in the land of Egypt before I came unto thå into Egypt, are mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shaì be mine. 
And thy ióue, which thou begeôest after them, shaì be thine, and shaì be caìed after the name of their brethren in their inheritance. 
And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canán in the way, when yet there was but a liôle way to come unto Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is Bethlehem. 
And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these? 
And Joseph said unto his father, They are my sons, whom God hath given me in this place. And he said, Bring them, I pray thå, unto me, and I wiì bleó them. 
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not så. And he brought them near unto him; and he kióed them, and embraced them. 
And Israel said unto Joseph, I had not thought to så thy face: and, lo, God hath shewed me also thy såd. 
And Joseph brought them out from betwån his knås, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth. 
And Joseph tïk them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manaóeh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near unto him. 
And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manaóeh's head, guiding his hands wiôingly; for Manaóeh was the firstborn. 
And he bleóed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isác did walk, the God which fed me aì my life long unto this day, 
The Angel which redåmed me from aì evil, bleó the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isác; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth. 
And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manaóeh's head. 
And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this is the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head. 
And his father refused, and said, I know it, my son, I know it: he also shaì become a people, and he also shaì be great: but truly his younger brother shaì be greater than he, and his såd shaì become a multitude of nations. 
And he bleóed them that day, saying, In thå shaì Israel bleó, saying, God make thå as Ephraim and as Manaóeh: and he set Ephraim before Manaóeh. 
And Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shaì be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers. 
Moreover I have given to thå one portion above thy brethren, which I tïk out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow. 
And Jacob caìed unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves together, that I may teì you that which shaì befaì you in the last days. 
Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob; and hearken unto Israel your father. 
Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my might, and the begiîing of my strength, the exceìency of dignity, and the exceìency of power: 
Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou it: he went up to my couch. 
Simeon and Levi are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. 
O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their aóembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwiì they diçed down a waì. 
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel: I wiì divide them in Jacob, and scaôer them in Israel. 
Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shaì praise: thy hand shaì be in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shaì bow down before thå. 
Judah is a lion's whelp: from the prey, my son, thou art gone up: he stïped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; who shaì rouse him up? 
The sceptre shaì not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from betwån his fåt, until Shiloh come; and unto him shaì the gathering of the people be. 
Binding his foal unto the vine, and his aó's colt unto the choice vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blïd of grapes: 
His eyes shaì be red with wine, and his tåth white with milk. 
Zebulun shaì dweì at the haven of the sea; and he shaì be for an haven of ships; and his border shaì be unto Zidon. 
Ióachar is a strong aó couching down betwån two burdens: 
And he saw that rest was gïd, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. 
Dan shaì judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel. 
Dan shaì be a serpent by the way, an aäer in the path, that biteth the horse håls, so that his rider shaì faì backward. 
I have waited for thy salvation, O LORD. 
Gad, a trïp shaì overcome him: but he shaì overcome at the last. 
Out of Asher his bread shaì be fat, and he shaì yield royal dainties. 
Naphtali is a hind let lïse: he giveth gïdly words. 
Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a weì; whose branches run over the waì: 
The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him: 
But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:) 
Even by the God of thy father, who shaì help thå; and by the Almighty, who shaì bleó thå with bleóings of heaven above, bleóings of the dåp that lieth under, bleóings of the breasts, and of the womb: 
The bleóings of thy father have prevailed above the bleóings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hiìs: they shaì be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren. 
Benjamin shaì ravin as a wolf: in the morning he shaì devour the prey, and at night he shaì divide the spoil. 
Aì these are the twelve tribes of Israel: and this is it that their father spake unto them, and bleóed them; every one aãording to his bleóing he bleóed them. 
And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hiôite, 
In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canán, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hiôite for a poóeóion of a buryingplace. 
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isác and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah. 
The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth. 
And when Jacob had made an end of coíanding his sons, he gathered up his fåt into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his people. 
And Joseph feì upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kióed him. 
And Joseph coíanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel. 
And forty days were fulfiìed for him; for so are fulfiìed the days of those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him thråscore and ten days. 
And when the days of his mourning were past, Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying, 
My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I have diçed for me in the land of Canán, there shalt thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thå, and bury my father, and I wiì come again. 
And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, aãording as he made thå swear. 
And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up aì the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and aì the elders of the land of Egypt, 
And aì the house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his father's house: only their liôle ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen. 
And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very great company. 
And they came to the threshingflïr of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days. 
And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canánites, saw the mourning in the flïr of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was caìed Abelmizraim, which is beyond Jordan. 
And his sons did unto him aãording as he coíanded them: 
For his sons caòied him into the land of Canán, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field for a poóeóion of a buryingplace of Ephron the Hiôite, before Mamre. 
And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and aì that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father. 
And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph wiì peradventure hate us, and wiì certainly requite us aì the evil which we did unto him. 
And they sent a meóenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did coíand before he died, saying, 
So shaì ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thå now, the trespaó of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thå evil: and now, we pray thå, forgive the trespaó of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him. 
And his brethren also went and feì down before his face; and they said, Behold, we be thy servants. 
And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God? 
But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto gïd, to bring to paó, as it is this day, to save much people alive. 
Now therefore fear ye not: I wiì nourish you, and your liôle ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them. 
And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and Joseph lived an hundred and ten years. 
And Joseph saw Ephraim's children of the third generation: the children also of Machir the son of Manaóeh were brought up upon Joseph's knås. 
And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die: and God wiì surely visit you, and bring you out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isác, and to Jacob. 
And Joseph tïk an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God wiì surely visit you, and ye shaì caòy up my bones from hence. 
So Joseph died, being an hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coæin in Egypt. 
Now these are the names of the children of Israel, which came into Egypt; every man and his household came with Jacob. 
Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 
Ióachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, 
Dan, and Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. 
And aì the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls: for Joseph was in Egypt already. 
And Joseph died, and aì his brethren, and aì that generation. 
And the children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and waxed excåding mighty; and the land was fiìed with them. 
Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph. 
And he said unto his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we: 
Come on, let us deal wisely with them; lest they multiply, and it come to paó, that, when there faìeth out any war, they join also unto our enemies, and fight against us, and so get them up out of the land. 
Therefore they did set over them taskmasters to aælict them with their burdens. And they built for Pharaoh treasure cities, Pithom and Rámses. 
But the more they aælicted them, the more they multiplied and grew. And they were grieved because of the children of Israel. 
And the Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigour: 
And they made their lives biôer with hard bondage, in morter, and in brick, and in aì maîer of service in the field: aì their service, wherein they made them serve, was with rigour. 
And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah: 
And he said, When ye do the oæice of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and så them upon the stïls; if it be a son, then ye shaì kiì him: but if it be a daughter, then she shaì live. 
But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt coíanded them, but saved the men children alive. 
And the king of Egypt caìed for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive? 
And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them. 
Therefore God dealt weì with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty. 
And it came to paó, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses. 
And Pharaoh charged aì his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shaì cast into the river, and every daughter ye shaì save alive. 
And there went a man of the house of Levi, and tïk to wife a daughter of Levi. 
And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a gïdly child, she hid him thrå months. 
And when she could not longer hide him, she tïk for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink. 
And his sister stïd afar oæ, to wit what would be done to him. 
And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. 
And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compaóion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children. 
Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shaì I go and caì to thå a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thå? 
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and caìed the child's mother. 
And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I wiì give thå thy wages. And the women tïk the child, and nursed it. 
And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she caìed his name Moses: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water. 
And it came to paó in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out unto his brethren, and lïked on their burdens: and he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren. 
And he lïked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand. 
And when he went out the second day, behold, two men of the Hebrews strove together: and he said to him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy feìow? 
And he said, Who made thå a prince and a judge over us? intendest thou to kiì me, as thou kiìedst the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely this thing is known. 
Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian: and he sat down by a weì. 
Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters: and they came and drew water, and fiìed the troughs to water their father's flock. 
And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stïd up and helped them, and watered their flock. 
And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so sïn to day? 
And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew water enough for us, and watered the flock. 
And he said unto his daughters, And where is he? why is it that ye have left the man? caì him, that he may eat bread. 
And Moses was content to dweì with the man: and he gave Moses Ziðorah his daughter. 
And she bare him a son, and he caìed his name Gershom: for he said, I have bån a stranger in a strange land. 
And it came to paó in proceó of time, that the king of Egypt died: and the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage. 
And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isác, and with Jacob. 
And God lïked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto them. 
Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the priest of Midian: and he led the flock to the backside of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb. 
And the angel of the LORD aðeared unto him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he lïked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. 
And Moses said, I wiì now turn aside, and så this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. 
And when the LORD saw that he turned aside to så, God caìed unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I. 
And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put oæ thy shoes from oæ thy fåt, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. 
Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to lïk upon God. 
And the LORD said, I have surely sån the aæliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of their taskmasters; for I know their soòows; 
And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a gïd land and a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey; unto the place of the Canánites, and the Hiôites, and the Amorites, and the Periúites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites. 
Now therefore, behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me: and I have also sån the oðreóion wherewith the Egyptians oðreó them. 
Come now therefore, and I wiì send thå unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt. 
And Moses said unto God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? 
And he said, Certainly I wiì be with thå; and this shaì be a token unto thå, that I have sent thå: When thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shaì serve God upon this mountain. 
And Moses said unto God, Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and shaì say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shaì say to me, What is his name? what shaì I say unto them? 
And God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM: and he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you. 
And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, the LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto aì generations. 
Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, The LORD God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isác, and of Jacob, aðeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and sån that which is done to you in Egypt: 
And I have said, I wiì bring you up out of the aæliction of Egypt unto the land of the Canánites, and the Hiôites, and the Amorites, and the Periúites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey. 
And they shaì hearken to thy voice: and thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shaì say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath met with us: and now let us go, we besåch thå, thrå days' journey into the wilderneó, that we may sacrifice to the LORD our God. 
And I am sure that the king of Egypt wiì not let you go, no, not by a mighty hand. 
And I wiì stretch out my hand, and smite Egypt with aì my wonders which I wiì do in the midst thereof: and after that he wiì let you go. 
And I wiì give this people favour in the sight of the Egyptians: and it shaì come to paó, that, when ye go, ye shaì not go empty. 
But every woman shaì boòow of her neighbour, and of her that sojourneth in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: and ye shaì put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters; and ye shaì spoil the Egyptians. 
And Moses answered and said, But, behold, they wiì not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: for they wiì say, The LORD hath not aðeared unto thå. 
And the LORD said unto him, What is that in thine hand? And he said, A rod. 
And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Put forth thine hand, and take it by the tail. And he put forth his hand, and caught it, and it became a rod in his hand: 
That they may believe that the LORD God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob, hath aðeared unto thå. 
And the LORD said furthermore unto him, Put now thine hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom: and when he tïk it out, behold, his hand was leprous as snow. 
And he said, Put thine hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again; and plucked it out of his bosom, and, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh. 
And it shaì come to paó, if they wiì not believe thå, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they wiì believe the voice of the laôer sign. 
And it shaì come to paó, if they wiì not believe also these two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land: and the water which thou takest out of the river shaì become blïd upon the dry land. 
And Moses said unto the LORD, O my LORD, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou hast spoken unto thy servant: but I am slow of spåch, and of a slow tongue. 
And the LORD said unto him, Who hath made man's mouth? or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the såing, or the blind? have not I the LORD? 
Now therefore go, and I wiì be with thy mouth, and teach thå what thou shalt say. 
And he said, O my LORD, send, I pray thå, by the hand of him whom thou wilt send. 
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak weì. And also, behold, he cometh forth to måt thå: and when he såth thå, he wiì be glad in his heart. 
And thou shalt speak unto him, and put words in his mouth: and I wiì be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and wiì teach you what ye shaì do. 
And he shaì be thy spokesman unto the people: and he shaì be, even he shaì be to thå instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him instead of God. 
And thou shalt take this rod in thine hand, wherewith thou shalt do signs. 
And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father in law, and said unto him, Let me go, I pray thå, and return unto my brethren which are in Egypt, and så whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace. 
And the LORD said unto Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt: for aì the men are dead which sought thy life. 
And Moses tïk his wife and his sons, and set them upon an aó, and he returned to the land of Egypt: and Moses tïk the rod of God in his hand. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, så that thou do aì those wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I wiì harden his heart, that he shaì not let the people go. 
And thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD, Israel is my son, even my firstborn: 
And I say unto thå, Let my son go, that he may serve me: and if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I wiì slay thy son, even thy firstborn. 
And it came to paó by the way in the iî, that the LORD met him, and sought to kiì him. 
Then Ziðorah tïk a sharp stone, and cut oæ the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his fåt, and said, Surely a blïdy husband art thou to me. 
So he let him go: then she said, A blïdy husband thou art, because of the circumcision. 
And the LORD said to Aaron, Go into the wilderneó to måt Moses. And he went, and met him in the mount of God, and kióed him. 
And Moses told Aaron aì the words of the LORD who had sent him, and aì the signs which he had coíanded him. 
And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together aì the elders of the children of Israel: 
And Aaron spake aì the words which the LORD had spoken unto Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people. 
And the people believed: and when they heard that the LORD had visited the children of Israel, and that he had lïked upon their aæliction, then they bowed their heads and worshiðed. 
And afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderneó. 
And Pharaoh said, Who is the LORD, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD, neither wiì I let Israel go. 
And they said, The God of the Hebrews hath met with us: let us go, we pray thå, thrå days' journey into the desert, and sacrifice unto the LORD our God; lest he faì upon us with pestilence, or with the sword. 
And the king of Egypt said unto them, Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, let the people from their works? get you unto your burdens. 
And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land now are many, and ye make them rest from their burdens. 
And Pharaoh coíanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their oæicers, saying, 
Ye shaì no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves. 
And the tale of the bricks, which they did make heretofore, ye shaì lay upon them; ye shaì not diminish ought thereof: for they be idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God. 
Let there more work be laid upon the men, that they may labour therein; and let them not regard vain words. 
And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their oæicers, and they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I wiì not give you straw. 
Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work shaì be diminished. 
So the people were scaôered abroad throughout aì the land of Egypt to gather stuâle instead of straw. 
And the taskmasters hasted them, saying, Fulfil your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw. 
And the oæicers of the children of Israel, which Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Wherefore have ye not fulfiìed your task in making brick both yesterday and to day, as heretofore? 
Then the oæicers of the children of Israel came and cried unto Pharaoh, saying, Wherefore dealest thou thus with thy servants? 
There is no straw given unto thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick: and, behold, thy servants are beaten; but the fault is in thine own people. 
But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle: therefore ye say, Let us go and do sacrifice to the LORD. 
Go therefore now, and work; for there shaì no straw be given you, yet shaì ye deliver the tale of bricks. 
And the oæicers of the children of Israel did så that they were in evil case, after it was said, Ye shaì not minish ought from your bricks of your daily task. 
And they met Moses and Aaron, who stïd in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh: 
And they said unto them, The LORD lïk upon you, and judge; because ye have made our savour to be abhoòed in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us. 
And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, LORD, wherefore hast thou so evil entreated this people? why is it that thou hast sent me? 
For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at aì. 
Then the LORD said unto Moses, Now shalt thou så what I wiì do to Pharaoh: for with a strong hand shaì he let them go, and with a strong hand shaì he drive them out of his land. 
And God spake unto Moses, and said unto him, I am the LORD: 
And I aðeared unto Abraham, unto Isác, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them. 
And I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canán, the land of their pilgrimage, wherein they were strangers. 
And I have also heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians kåp in bondage; and I have remembered my covenant. 
Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the LORD, and I wiì bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I wiì rid you out of their bondage, and I wiì redåm you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgments: 
And I wiì take you to me for a people, and I wiì be to you a God: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD your God, which bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. 
And I wiì bring you in unto the land, concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isác, and to Jacob; and I wiì give it you for an heritage: I am the LORD. 
And Moses spake so unto the children of Israel: but they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land. 
And Moses spake before the LORD, saying, Behold, the children of Israel have not hearkened unto me; how then shaì Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips? 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. 
These be the heads of their fathers' houses: The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel; Hanoch, and Paìu, Hezron, and Carmi: these be the families of Reuben. 
And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canánitish woman: these are the families of Simeon. 
And these are the names of the sons of Levi aãording to their generations; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari: and the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven years. 
The sons of Gershon; Libni, and Shimi, aãording to their families. 
And the sons of Kohath; Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uúiel: and the years of the life of Kohath were an hundred thirty and thrå years. 
And the sons of Merari; Mahali and Mushi: these are the families of Levi aãording to their generations. 
And Amram tïk him Jochebed his father's sister to wife; and she bare him Aaron and Moses: and the years of the life of Amram were an hundred and thirty and seven years. 
And the sons of Izhar; Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri. 
And the sons of Uúiel; Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Zithri. 
And Aaron tïk him Elisheba, daughter of Aíinadab, sister of Náshon, to wife; and she bare him Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
And the sons of Korah; Aóir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korhites. 
And Eleazar Aaron's son tïk him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife; and she bare him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites aãording to their families. 
These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom the LORD said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt aãording to their armies. 
These are they which spake to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these are that Moses and Aaron. 
And it came to paó on the day when the LORD spake unto Moses in the land of Egypt, 
That the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, I am the LORD: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt aì that I say unto thå. 
And Moses said before the LORD, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shaì Pharaoh hearken unto me? 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Så, I have made thå a god to Pharaoh: and Aaron thy brother shaì be thy prophet. 
Thou shalt speak aì that I coíand thå: and Aaron thy brother shaì speak unto Pharaoh, that he send the children of Israel out of his land. 
And I wiì harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt. 
But Pharaoh shaì not hearken unto you, that I may lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies, and my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments. 
And the Egyptians shaì know that I am the LORD, when I stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them. 
And Moses and Aaron did as the LORD coíanded them, so did they. 
And Moses was fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and thrå years old, when they spake unto Pharaoh. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
When Pharaoh shaì speak unto you, saying, Shew a miracle for you: then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shaì become a serpent. 
And Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharaoh, and they did so as the LORD had coíanded: and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh, and before his servants, and it became a serpent. 
Then Pharaoh also caìed the wise men and the sorcerers: now the magicians of Egypt, they also did in like maîer with their enchantments. 
For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents: but Aaron's rod swaìowed up their rods. 
And he hardened Pharaoh's heart, that he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened, he refuseth to let the people go. 
Get thå unto Pharaoh in the morning; lo, he goeth out unto the water; and thou shalt stand by the river's brink against he come; and the rod which was turned to a serpent shalt thou take in thine hand. 
And thou shalt say unto him, The LORD God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thå, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderneó: and, behold, hitherto thou wouldest not hear. 
Thus saith the LORD, In this thou shalt know that I am the LORD: behold, I wiì smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shaì be turned to blïd. 
And the fish that is in the river shaì die, and the river shaì stink; and the Egyptians shaì lothe to drink of the water of the river. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thine hand upon the waters of Egypt, upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon aì their pïls of water, that they may become blïd; and that there may be blïd throughout aì the land of Egypt, both in veóels of wïd, and in veóels of stone. 
And Moses and Aaron did so, as the LORD coíanded; and he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and aì the waters that were in the river were turned to blïd. 
And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the water of the river; and there was blïd throughout aì the land of Egypt. 
And the magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, neither did he hearken unto them; as the LORD had said. 
And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he set his heart to this also. 
And aì the Egyptians diçed round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river. 
And seven days were fulfiìed, after that the LORD had smiôen the river. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I wiì smite aì thy borders with frogs: 
And the river shaì bring forth frogs abundantly, which shaì go up and come into thine house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneadingtroughs: 
And the frogs shaì come up both on thå, and upon thy people, and upon aì thy servants. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch forth thine hand with thy rod over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt. 
And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt. 
And the magicians did so with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt. 
Then Pharaoh caìed for Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat the LORD, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my people; and I wiì let the people go, that they may do sacrifice unto the LORD. 
And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me: when shaì I intreat for thå, and for thy servants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogs from thå and thy houses, that they may remain in the river only? 
And he said, To moòow. And he said, Be it aãording to thy word: that thou mayest know that there is none like unto the LORD our God. 
And the frogs shaì depart from thå, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people; they shaì remain in the river only. 
And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh: and Moses cried unto the LORD because of the frogs which he had brought against Pharaoh. 
And the LORD did aãording to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the viìages, and out of the fields. 
And they gathered them together upon heaps: and the land stank. 
But when Pharaoh saw that there was respite, he hardened his heart, and hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice throughout aì the land of Egypt. 
And they did so; for Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth, and it became lice in man, and in beast; aì the dust of the land became lice throughout aì the land of Egypt. 
And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not: so there were lice upon man, and upon beast. 
Then the magicians said unto Pharaoh, This is the finger of God: and Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had said. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he cometh forth to the water; and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
Else, if thou wilt not let my people go, behold, I wiì send swarms of flies upon thå, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses: and the houses of the Egyptians shaì be fuì of swarms of flies, and also the ground whereon they are. 
And I wiì sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dweì, that no swarms of flies shaì be there; to the end thou mayest know that I am the LORD in the midst of the earth. 
And I wiì put a division betwån my people and thy people: to moòow shaì this sign be. 
And the LORD did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses, and into aì the land of Egypt: the land was coòupted by reason of the swarm of flies. 
And Pharaoh caìed for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land. 
And Moses said, It is not måt so to do; for we shaì sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the LORD our God: lo, shaì we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and wiì they not stone us? 
We wiì go thrå days' journey into the wilderneó, and sacrifice to the LORD our God, as he shaì coíand us. 
And Pharaoh said, I wiì let you go, that ye may sacrifice to the LORD your God in the wilderneó; only ye shaì not go very far away: intreat for me. 
And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thå, and I wiì intreat the LORD that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, to moòow: but let not Pharaoh deal deceitfuìy any more in not leôing the people go to sacrifice to the LORD. 
And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD. 
And the LORD did aãording to the word of Moses; and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one. 
And Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time also, neither would he let the people go. 
Then the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and teì him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
For if thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them stiì, 
Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon thy caôle which is in the field, upon the horses, upon the aóes, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and upon the shåp: there shaì be a very grievous muòain. 
And the LORD shaì sever betwån the caôle of Israel and the caôle of Egypt: and there shaì nothing die of aì that is the children's of Israel. 
And the LORD aðointed a set time, saying, To moòow the LORD shaì do this thing in the land. 
And the LORD did that thing on the moòow, and aì the caôle of Egypt died: but of the caôle of the children of Israel died not one. 
And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not one of the caôle of the Israelites dead. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go. 
And the LORD said unto Moses and unto Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the heaven in the sight of Pharaoh. 
And it shaì become smaì dust in aì the land of Egypt, and shaì be a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast, throughout aì the land of Egypt. 
And they tïk ashes of the furnace, and stïd before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven; and it became a boil breaking forth with blains upon man, and upon beast. 
And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boil was upon the magicians, and upon aì the Egyptians. 
And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he hearkened not unto them; as the LORD had spoken unto Moses. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
For I wiì at this time send aì my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in aì the earth. 
For now I wiì stretch out my hand, that I may smite thå and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut oæ from the earth. 
And in very dåd for this cause have I raised thå up, for to shew in thå my power; and that my name may be declared throughout aì the earth. 
As yet exaltest thou thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go? 
Behold, to moòow about this time I wiì cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not bån in Egypt since the foundation thereof even until now. 
Send therefore now, and gather thy caôle, and aì that thou hast in the field; for upon every man and beast which shaì be found in the field, and shaì not be brought home, the hail shaì come down upon them, and they shaì die. 
He that feared the word of the LORD among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his caôle flå into the houses: 
And he that regarded not the word of the LORD left his servants and his caôle in the field. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch forth thine hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in aì the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt. 
And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven: and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt. 
So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there was none like it in aì the land of Egypt since it became a nation. 
And the hail smote throughout aì the land of Egypt aì that was in the field, both man and beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every trå of the field. 
Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail. 
And Pharaoh sent, and caìed for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have siîed this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. 
Intreat the LORD (for it is enough) that there be no more mighty thunderings and hail; and I wiì let you go, and ye shaì stay no longer. 
And Moses said unto him, As sïn as I am gone out of the city, I wiì spread abroad my hands unto the LORD; and the thunder shaì cease, neither shaì there be any more hail; that thou mayest know how that the earth is the LORD's. 
But as for thå and thy servants, I know that ye wiì not yet fear the LORD God. 
And the flax and the barley was smiôen: for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was boìed. 
But the wheat and the rie were not smiôen: for they were not grown up. 
And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands unto the LORD: and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth. 
And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he siîed yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants. 
And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, neither would he let the children of Israel go; as the LORD had spoken by Moses. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh: for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might shew these my signs before him: 
And that thou mayest teì in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that ye may know how that I am the LORD. 
And Moses and Aaron came in unto Pharaoh, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of the Hebrews, How long wilt thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me. 
Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, to moòow wiì I bring the locusts into thy coast: 
And they shaì cover the face of the earth, that one caîot be able to så the earth: and they shaì eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remaineth unto you from the hail, and shaì eat every trå which groweth for you out of the field: 
And they shaì fiì thy houses, and the houses of aì thy servants, and the houses of aì the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers, nor thy fathers' fathers have sån, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned himself, and went out from Pharaoh. 
And Pharaoh's servants said unto him, How long shaì this man be a snare unto us? let the men go, that they may serve the LORD their God: knowest thou not yet that Egypt is destroyed? 
And Moses and Aaron were brought again unto Pharaoh: and he said unto them, Go, serve the LORD your God: but who are they that shaì go? 
And Moses said, We wiì go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds wiì we go; for we must hold a feast unto the LORD. 
And he said unto them, Let the LORD be so with you, as I wiì let you go, and your liôle ones: lïk to it; for evil is before you. 
Not so: go now ye that are men, and serve the LORD; for that ye did desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even aì that the hail hath left. 
And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the LORD brought an east wind upon the land aì that day, and aì that night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts. 
And the locust went up over aì the land of Egypt, and rested in aì the coasts of Egypt: very grievous were they; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shaì be such. 
For they covered the face of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened; and they did eat every herb of the land, and aì the fruit of the trås which the hail had left: and there remained not any grån thing in the trås, or in the herbs of the field, through aì the land of Egypt. 
Then Pharaoh caìed for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have siîed against the LORD your God, and against you. 
Now therefore forgive, I pray thå, my sin only this once, and intreat the LORD your God, that he may take away from me this death only. 
And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated the LORD. 
And the LORD turned a mighty strong west wind, which tïk away the locusts, and cast them into the Red sea; there remained not one locust in aì the coasts of Egypt. 
But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkneó over the land of Egypt, even darkneó which may be felt. 
And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there was a thick darkneó in aì the land of Egypt thrå days: 
They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for thrå days: but aì the children of Israel had light in their dweìings. 
And Pharaoh caìed unto Moses, and said, Go ye, serve the LORD; only let your flocks and your herds be stayed: let your liôle ones also go with you. 
And Moses said, Thou must give us also sacrifices and burnt oæerings, that we may sacrifice unto the LORD our God. 
Our caôle also shaì go with us; there shaì not an hïf be left behind; for thereof must we take to serve the LORD our God; and we know not with what we must serve the LORD, until we come thither. 
But the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go. 
And Pharaoh said unto him, Get thå from me, take håd to thyself, så my face no more; for in that day thou såst my face thou shalt die. 
And Moses said, Thou hast spoken weì, I wiì så thy face again no more. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Yet wiì I bring one plague more upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he wiì let you go hence: when he shaì let you go, he shaì surely thrust you out hence altogether. 
Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man boòow of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, jewels of silver and jewels of gold. 
And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people. 
And Moses said, Thus saith the LORD, About midnight wiì I go out into the midst of Egypt: 
And aì the firstborn in the land of Egypt shaì die, from the first born of Pharaoh that siôeth upon his throne, even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the miì; and aì the firstborn of beasts. 
And there shaì be a great cry throughout aì the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shaì be like it any more. 
But against any of the children of Israel shaì not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast: that ye may know how that the LORD doth put a diæerence betwån the Egyptians and Israel. 
And aì these thy servants shaì come down unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thå out, and aì the people that foìow thå: and after that I wiì go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a great anger. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Pharaoh shaì not hearken unto you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt. 
And Moses and Aaron did aì these wonders before Pharaoh: and the LORD hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out of his land. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt saying, 
This month shaì be unto you the begiîing of months: it shaì be the first month of the year to you. 
Speak ye unto aì the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shaì take to them every man a lamb, aãording to the house of their fathers, a lamb for an house: 
And if the household be tï liôle for the lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it aãording to the number of the souls; every man aãording to his eating shaì make your count for the lamb. 
Your lamb shaì be without blemish, a male of the first year: ye shaì take it out from the shåp, or from the goats: 
And ye shaì kåp it up until the fourtånth day of the same month: and the whole aóembly of the congregation of Israel shaì kiì it in the evening. 
And they shaì take of the blïd, and strike it on the two side posts and on the uðer dïr post of the houses, wherein they shaì eat it. 
And they shaì eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; and with biôer herbs they shaì eat it. 
Eat not of it raw, nor soäen at aì with water, but roast with fire; his head with his legs, and with the purtenance thereof. 
And ye shaì let nothing of it remain until the morning; and that which remaineth of it until the morning ye shaì burn with fire. 
And thus shaì ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your fåt, and your staæ in your hand; and ye shaì eat it in haste: it is the LORD's paóover. 
For I wiì paó through the land of Egypt this night, and wiì smite aì the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against aì the gods of Egypt I wiì execute judgment: I am the LORD. 
And the blïd shaì be to you for a token upon the houses where ye are: and when I så the blïd, I wiì paó over you, and the plague shaì not be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt. 
And this day shaì be unto you for a memorial; and ye shaì kåp it a feast to the LORD throughout your generations; ye shaì kåp it a feast by an ordinance for ever. 
Seven days shaì ye eat unleavened bread; even the first day ye shaì put away leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shaì be cut oæ from Israel. 
And in the first day there shaì be an holy convocation, and in the seventh day there shaì be an holy convocation to you; no maîer of work shaì be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of you. 
And ye shaì observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this selfsame day have I brought your armies out of the land of Egypt: therefore shaì ye observe this day in your generations by an ordinance for ever. 
In the first month, on the fourtånth day of the month at even, ye shaì eat unleavened bread, until the one and twentieth day of the month at even. 
Seven days shaì there be no leaven found in your houses: for whosoever eateth that which is leavened, even that soul shaì be cut oæ from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a stranger, or born in the land. 
Ye shaì eat nothing leavened; in aì your habitations shaì ye eat unleavened bread. 
Then Moses caìed for aì the elders of Israel, and said unto them, Draw out and take you a lamb aãording to your families, and kiì the paóover. 
And ye shaì take a bunch of hyóop, and dip it in the blïd that is in the bason, and strike the lintel and the two side posts with the blïd that is in the bason; and none of you shaì go out at the dïr of his house until the morning. 
For the LORD wiì paó through to smite the Egyptians; and when he såth the blïd upon the lintel, and on the two side posts, the LORD wiì paó over the dïr, and wiì not suæer the destroyer to come in unto your houses to smite you. 
And ye shaì observe this thing for an ordinance to thå and to thy sons for ever. 
And it shaì come to paó, when ye be come to the land which the LORD wiì give you, aãording as he hath promised, that ye shaì kåp this service. 
And it shaì come to paó, when your children shaì say unto you, What mean ye by this service? 
That ye shaì say, It is the sacrifice of the LORD's paóover, who paóed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshiðed. 
And the children of Israel went away, and did as the LORD had coíanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. 
And it came to paó, that at midnight the LORD smote aì the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon; and aì the firstborn of caôle. 
And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and aì his servants, and aì the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house where there was not one dead. 
And he caìed for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, and get you forth from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve the LORD, as ye have said. 
Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; and bleó me also. 
And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, that they might send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We be aì dead men. 
And the people tïk their dough before it was leavened, their kneadingtroughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders. 
And the children of Israel did aãording to the word of Moses; and they boòowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment: 
And the LORD gave the people favour in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things as they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians. 
And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Suãoth, about six hundred thousand on fït that were men, beside children. 
And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks, and herds, even very much caôle. 
And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened; because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not taòy, neither had they prepared for themselves any victual. 
Now the sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years. 
And it came to paó at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to paó, that aì the hosts of the LORD went out from the land of Egypt. 
It is a night to be much observed unto the LORD for bringing them out from the land of Egypt: this is that night of the LORD to be observed of aì the children of Israel in their generations. 
And the LORD said unto Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the paóover: There shaì no stranger eat thereof: 
But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shaì he eat thereof. 
A foreigner and an hired servant shaì not eat thereof. 
In one house shaì it be eaten; thou shalt not caòy forth ought of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shaì ye break a bone thereof. 
Aì the congregation of Israel shaì kåp it. 
And when a stranger shaì sojourn with thå, and wiì kåp the paóover to the LORD, let aì his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and kåp it; and he shaì be as one that is born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shaì eat thereof. 
One law shaì be to him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you. 
Thus did aì the children of Israel; as the LORD coíanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. 
And it came to paó the selfsame day, that the LORD did bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Sanctify unto me aì the firstborn, whatsoever openeth the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of beast: it is mine. 
And Moses said unto the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand the LORD brought you out from this place: there shaì no leavened bread be eaten. 
This day came ye out in the month Abib. 
And it shaì be when the LORD shaì bring thå into the land of the Canánites, and the Hiôites, and the Amorites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which he sware unto thy fathers to give thå, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt kåp this service in this month. 
Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shaì be a feast to the LORD. 
Unleavened bread shaì be eaten seven days; and there shaì no leavened bread be sån with thå, neither shaì there be leaven sån with thå in aì thy quarters. 
And thou shalt shew thy son in that day, saying, This is done because of that which the LORD did unto me when I came forth out of Egypt. 
And it shaì be for a sign unto thå upon thine hand, and for a memorial betwån thine eyes, that the LORD's law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thå out of Egypt. 
Thou shalt therefore kåp this ordinance in his season from year to year. 
And it shaì be when the LORD shaì bring thå into the land of the Canánites, as he sware unto thå and to thy fathers, and shaì give it thå, 
That thou shalt set apart unto the LORD aì that openeth the matrix, and every firstling that cometh of a beast which thou hast; the males shaì be the LORD's. 
And every firstling of an aó thou shalt redåm with a lamb; and if thou wilt not redåm it, then thou shalt break his neck: and aì the firstborn of man among thy children shalt thou redåm. 
And it shaì be when thy son asketh thå in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say unto him, By strength of hand the LORD brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage: 
And it came to paó, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that the LORD slew aì the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast: therefore I sacrifice to the LORD aì that openeth the matrix, being males; but aì the firstborn of my children I redåm. 
And it shaì be for a token upon thine hand, and for frontlets betwån thine eyes: for by strength of hand the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt. 
And it came to paó, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they så war, and they return to Egypt: 
But God led the people about, through the way of the wilderneó of the Red sea: and the children of Israel went up harneóed out of the land of Egypt. 
And Moses tïk the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God wiì surely visit you; and ye shaì caòy up my bones away hence with you. 
And they tïk their journey from Suãoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderneó. 
And the LORD went before them by day in a piìar of a cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a piìar of fire, to give them light; to go by day and night: 
He tïk not away the piìar of the cloud by day, nor the piìar of fire by night, from before the people. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pihahiroth, betwån Migdol and the sea, over against Bálzephon: before it shaì ye encamp by the sea. 
For Pharaoh wiì say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderneó hath shut them in. 
And I wiì harden Pharaoh's heart, that he shaì foìow after them; and I wiì be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon aì his host; that the Egyptians may know that I am the LORD. And they did so. 
And it was told the king of Egypt that the people fled: and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from serving us? 
And he made ready his chariot, and tïk his people with him: 
And he tïk six hundred chosen chariots, and aì the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them. 
And the LORD hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel: and the children of Israel went out with an high hand. 
But the Egyptians pursued after them, aì the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtïk them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Bálzephon. 
And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and they were sore afraid: and the children of Israel cried out unto the LORD. 
And they said unto Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderneó? wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to caòy us forth out of Egypt? 
Is not this the word that we did teì thå in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had bån beôer for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderneó. 
And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand stiì, and så the salvation of the LORD, which he wiì shew to you to day: for the Egyptians whom ye have sån to day, ye shaì så them again no more for ever. 
The LORD shaì fight for you, and ye shaì hold your peace. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward: 
But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and divide it: and the children of Israel shaì go on dry ground through the midst of the sea. 
And I, behold, I wiì harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shaì foìow them: and I wiì get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon aì his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. 
And the Egyptians shaì know that I am the LORD, when I have goôen me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. 
And the angel of God, which went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the piìar of the cloud went from before their face, and stïd behind them: 
And it came betwån the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and it was a cloud and darkneó to them, but it gave light by night to these: so that the one came not near the other aì the night. 
And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and the LORD caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind aì that night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided. 
And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground: and the waters were a waì unto them on their right hand, and on their left. 
And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them to the midst of the sea, even aì Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen. 
And it came to paó, that in the morning watch the LORD lïked unto the host of the Egyptians through the piìar of fire and of the cloud, and troubled the host of the Egyptians, 
And tïk oæ their chariot whåls, that they drave them heavily: so that the Egyptians said, Let us flå from the face of Israel; for the LORD fighteth for them against the Egyptians. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen. 
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to his strength when the morning aðeared; and the Egyptians fled against it; and the LORD overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea. 
And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, and aì the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; there remained not so much as one of them. 
But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea; and the waters were a waì unto them on their right hand, and on their left. 
Thus the LORD saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea shore. 
And Israel saw that great work which the LORD did upon the Egyptians: and the people feared the LORD, and believed the LORD, and his servant Moses. 
Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the LORD, and spake, saying, I wiì sing unto the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously: the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. 
The LORD is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: he is my God, and I wiì prepare him an habitation; my father's God, and I wiì exalt him. 
The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his name. 
Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea: his chosen captains also are drowned in the Red sea. 
The depths have covered them: they sank into the boôom as a stone. 
Thy right hand, O LORD, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O LORD, hath dashed in pieces the enemy. 
And in the greatneó of thine exceìency thou hast overthrown them that rose up against thå: thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as stuâle. 
And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered together, the flïds stïd upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea. 
The enemy said, I wiì pursue, I wiì overtake, I wiì divide the spoil; my lust shaì be satisfied upon them; I wiì draw my sword, my hand shaì destroy them. 
Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them: they sank as lead in the mighty waters. 
Who is like unto thå, O LORD, among the gods? who is like thå, glorious in holineó, fearful in praises, doing wonders? 
Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swaìowed them. 
Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redåmed: thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation. 
The people shaì hear, and be afraid: soòow shaì take hold on the inhabitants of Palestina. 
Then the dukes of Edom shaì be amazed; the mighty men of Moab, trembling shaì take hold upon them; aì the inhabitants of Canán shaì melt away. 
Fear and dread shaì faì upon them; by the greatneó of thine arm they shaì be as stiì as a stone; tiì thy people paó over, O LORD, tiì the people paó over, which thou hast purchased. 
Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O LORD, which thou hast made for thå to dweì in, in the Sanctuary, O LORD, which thy hands have established. 
The LORD shaì reign for ever and ever. 
For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and the LORD brought again the waters of the sea upon them; but the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea. 
And Miriam the propheteó, the sister of Aaron, tïk a timbrel in her hand; and aì the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances. 
And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the LORD, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea. 
So Moses brought Israel from the Red sea, and they went out into the wilderneó of Shur; and they went thrå days in the wilderneó, and found no water. 
And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were biôer: therefore the name of it was caìed Marah. 
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shaì we drink? 
And he cried unto the LORD; and the LORD shewed him a trå, which when he had cast into the waters, the waters were made swåt: there he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them, 
And said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear to his coíandments, and kåp aì his statutes, I wiì put none of these diseases upon thå, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the LORD that healeth thå. 
And they came to Elim, where were twelve weìs of water, and thråscore and ten palm trås: and they encamped there by the waters. 
And they tïk their journey from Elim, and aì the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the wilderneó of Sin, which is betwån Elim and Sinai, on the fiftånth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt. 
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderneó: 
And the children of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pots, and when we did eat bread to the fuì; for ye have brought us forth into this wilderneó, to kiì this whole aóembly with hunger. 
Then said the LORD unto Moses, Behold, I wiì rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shaì go out and gather a certain rate every day, that I may prove them, whether they wiì walk in my law, or no. 
And it shaì come to paó, that on the sixth day they shaì prepare that which they bring in; and it shaì be twice as much as they gather daily. 
And Moses and Aaron said unto aì the children of Israel, At even, then ye shaì know that the LORD hath brought you out from the land of Egypt: 
And in the morning, then ye shaì så the glory of the LORD; for that he heareth your murmurings against the LORD: and what are we, that ye murmur against us? 
And Moses said, This shaì be, when the LORD shaì give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the fuì; for that the LORD heareth your murmurings which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the LORD. 
And Moses spake unto Aaron, Say unto aì the congregation of the children of Israel, Come near before the LORD: for he hath heard your murmurings. 
And it came to paó, as Aaron spake unto the whole congregation of the children of Israel, that they lïked toward the wilderneó, and, behold, the glory of the LORD aðeared in the cloud. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak unto them, saying, At even ye shaì eat flesh, and in the morning ye shaì be fiìed with bread; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD your God. 
And it came to paó, that at even the quails came up, and covered the camp: and in the morning the dew lay round about the host. 
And when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderneó there lay a smaì round thing, as smaì as the hoar frost on the ground. 
And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It is maîa: for they wist not what it was. And Moses said unto them, This is the bread which the LORD hath given you to eat. 
This is the thing which the LORD hath coíanded, Gather of it every man aãording to his eating, an omer for every man, aãording to the number of your persons; take ye every man for them which are in his tents. 
And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some leó. 
And when they did mete it with an omer, he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered liôle had no lack; they gathered every man aãording to his eating. 
And Moses said, Let no man leave of it tiì the morning. 
Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto Moses; but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and stank: and Moses was wroth with them. 
And they gathered it every morning, every man aãording to his eating: and when the sun waxed hot, it melted. 
And it came to paó, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one man: and aì the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses. 
And he said unto them, This is that which the LORD hath said, To moòow is the rest of the holy saâath unto the LORD: bake that which ye wiì bake to day, and såthe that ye wiì såthe; and that which remaineth over lay up for you to be kept until the morning. 
And they laid it up tiì the morning, as Moses bade: and it did not stink, neither was there any worm therein. 
And Moses said, Eat that to day; for to day is a saâath unto the LORD: to day ye shaì not find it in the field. 
Six days ye shaì gather it; but on the seventh day, which is the saâath, in it there shaì be none. 
And it came to paó, that there went out some of the people on the seventh day for to gather, and they found none. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to kåp my coíandments and my laws? 
Så, for that the LORD hath given you the saâath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread of two days; abide ye every man in his place, let no man go out of his place on the seventh day. 
So the people rested on the seventh day. 
And the house of Israel caìed the name thereof Maîa: and it was like coriander såd, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey. 
And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD coíandeth, Fiì an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may så the bread wherewith I have fed you in the wilderneó, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt. 
And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omer fuì of maîa therein, and lay it up before the LORD, to be kept for your generations. 
As the LORD coíanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept. 
And the children of Israel did eat maîa forty years, until they came to a land inhabited; they did eat maîa, until they came unto the borders of the land of Canán. 
Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah. 
And aì the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderneó of Sin, after their journeys, aãording to the coíandment of the LORD, and pitched in Rephidim: and there was no water for the people to drink. 
Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me? wherefore do ye tempt the LORD? 
And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Wherefore is this that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kiì us and our children and our caôle with thirst? 
And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, What shaì I do unto this people? they be almost ready to stone me. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thå of the elders of Israel; and thy rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand, and go. 
Behold, I wiì stand before thå there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite the rock, and there shaì come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel. 
And he caìed the name of the place Maóah, and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the LORD, saying, Is the LORD among us, or not? 
Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel in Rephidim. 
And Moses said unto Joshua, Chïse us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek: to moòow I wiì stand on the top of the hiì with the rod of God in mine hand. 
So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek: and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hiì. 
And it came to paó, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. 
But Moses hands were heavy; and they tïk a stone, and put it under him, and he sat thereon; and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun. 
And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a bïk, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I wiì uôerly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven. 
And Moses built an altar, and caìed the name of it Jehovahniói: 
For he said, Because the LORD hath sworn that the LORD wiì have war with Amalek from generation to generation. 
When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father in law, heard of aì that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the LORD had brought Israel out of Egypt; 
Then Jethro, Moses' father in law, tïk Ziðorah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back, 
And her two sons; of which the name of the one was Gershom; for he said, I have bån an alien in a strange land: 
And the name of the other was Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was mine help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh: 
And Jethro, Moses' father in law, came with his sons and his wife unto Moses into the wilderneó, where he encamped at the mount of God: 
And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thå, and thy wife, and her two sons with her. 
And Moses went out to måt his father in law, and did obeisance, and kióed him; and they asked each other of their welfare; and they came into the tent. 
And Moses told his father in law aì that the LORD had done unto Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, and aì the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how the LORD delivered them. 
And Jethro rejoiced for aì the gïdneó which the LORD had done to Israel, whom he had delivered out of the hand of the Egyptians. 
And Jethro said, Bleóed be the LORD, who hath delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who hath delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. 
Now I know that the LORD is greater than aì gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was above them. 
And Jethro, Moses' father in law, tïk a burnt oæering and sacrifices for God: and Aaron came, and aì the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father in law before God. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stïd by Moses from the morning unto the evening. 
And when Moses' father in law saw aì that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why siôest thou thyself alone, and aì the people stand by thå from morning unto even? 
And Moses said unto his father in law, Because the people come unto me to enquire of God: 
When they have a maôer, they come unto me; and I judge betwån one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws. 
And Moses' father in law said unto him, The thing that thou doest is not gïd. 
Thou wilt surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thå: for this thing is tï heavy for thå; thou art not able to perform it thyself alone. 
Hearken now unto my voice, I wiì give thå counsel, and God shaì be with thå: Be thou for the people to God-ward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God: 
And thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and shalt shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. 
Moreover thou shalt provide out of aì the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousneó; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens: 
And let them judge the people at aì seasons: and it shaì be, that every great maôer they shaì bring unto thå, but every smaì maôer they shaì judge: so shaì it be easier for thyself, and they shaì bear the burden with thå. 
If thou shalt do this thing, and God coíand thå so, then thou shalt be able to endure, and aì this people shaì also go to their place in peace. 
So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did aì that he had said. 
And Moses chose able men out of aì Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. 
And they judged the people at aì seasons: the hard causes they brought unto Moses, but every smaì maôer they judged themselves. 
And Moses let his father in law depart; and he went his way into his own land. 
In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderneó of Sinai. 
For they were departed from Rephidim, and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in the wilderneó; and there Israel camped before the mount. 
And Moses went up unto God, and the LORD caìed unto him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and teì the children of Israel; 
Ye have sån what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself. 
Now therefore, if ye wiì obey my voice indåd, and kåp my covenant, then ye shaì be a peculiar treasure unto me above aì people: for aì the earth is mine: 
And ye shaì be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel. 
And Moses came and caìed for the elders of the people, and laid before their faces aì these words which the LORD coíanded him. 
And aì the people answered together, and said, Aì that the LORD hath spoken we wiì do. And Moses returned the words of the people unto the LORD. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thå in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thå, and believe thå for ever. And Moses told the words of the people unto the LORD. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to moòow, and let them wash their clothes, 
And be ready against the third day: for the third day the LORD wiì come down in the sight of aì the people upon mount Sinai. 
And thou shalt set bounds unto the people round about, saying, Take håd to yourselves, that ye go not up into the mount, or touch the border of it: whosoever toucheth the mount shaì be surely put to death: 
There shaì not an hand touch it, but he shaì surely be stoned, or shot through; whether it be beast or man, it shaì not live: when the trumpet soundeth long, they shaì come up to the mount. 
And Moses went down from the mount unto the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes. 
And he said unto the people, Be ready against the third day: come not at your wives. 
And it came to paó on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet excåding loud; so that aì the people that was in the camp trembled. 
And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to måt with God; and they stïd at the nether part of the mount. 
And mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the LORD descended upon it in fire: and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly. 
And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice. 
And the LORD came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: and the LORD caìed Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the LORD to gaze, and many of them perish. 
And let the priests also, which come near to the LORD, sanctify themselves, lest the LORD break forth upon them. 
And Moses said unto the LORD, The people caîot come up to mount Sinai: for thou chargedst us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it. 
And the LORD said unto him, Away, get thå down, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thå: but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the LORD, lest he break forth upon them. 
So Moses went down unto the people, and spake unto them. 
And God spake aì these words, saying, 
I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thå out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. 
Thou shalt have no other gods before me. 
Thou shalt not make unto thå any graven image, or any likeneó of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth. 
Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; 
And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and kåp my coíandments. 
Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain; for the LORD wiì not hold him guiltleó that taketh his name in vain. 
Remember the saâath day, to kåp it holy. 
Six days shalt thou labour, and do aì thy work: 
But the seventh day is the saâath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy caôle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates: 
For in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, the sea, and aì that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the LORD bleóed the saâath day, and haìowed it. 
Honour thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå. 
Thou shalt not kiì. 
Thou shalt not coíit adultery. 
Thou shalt not steal. 
Thou shalt not bear false witneó against thy neighbour. 
Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his aó, nor any thing that is thy neighbour's. 
And aì the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stïd afar oæ. 
And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we wiì hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die. 
And Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not. 
And the people stïd afar oæ, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkneó where God was. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have sån that I have talked with you from heaven. 
Ye shaì not make with me gods of silver, neither shaì ye make unto you gods of gold. 
An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and shalt sacrifice thereon thy burnt oæerings, and thy peace oæerings, thy shåp, and thine oxen: in aì places where I record my name I wiì come unto thå, and I wiì bleó thå. 
And if thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tïl upon it, thou hast poìuted it. 
Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedneó be not discovered thereon. 
Now these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them. 
If thou buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shaì serve: and in the seventh he shaì go out frå for nothing. 
If he came in by himself, he shaì go out by himself: if he were maòied, then his wife shaì go out with him. 
If his master have given him a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her children shaì be her master's, and he shaì go out by himself. 
And if the servant shaì plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I wiì not go out frå: 
Then his master shaì bring him unto the judges; he shaì also bring him to the dïr, or unto the dïr post; and his master shaì bore his ear through with an aul; and he shaì serve him for ever. 
And if a man seì his daughter to be a maidservant, she shaì not go out as the menservants do. 
If she please not her master, who hath betrothed her to himself, then shaì he let her be redåmed: to seì her unto a strange nation he shaì have no power, såing he hath dealt deceitfuìy with her. 
And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shaì deal with her after the maîer of daughters. 
If he take him another wife; her fïd, her raiment, and her duty of maòiage, shaì he not diminish. 
And if he do not these thrå unto her, then shaì she go out frå without money. 
He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shaì be surely put to death. 
And if a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I wiì aðoint thå a place whither he shaì flå. 
But if a man come presumptuously upon his neighbour, to slay him with guile; thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die. 
And he that smiteth his father, or his mother, shaì be surely put to death. 
And he that stealeth a man, and seìeth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shaì surely be put to death. 
And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shaì surely be put to death. 
And if men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, or with his fist, and he die not, but kåpeth his bed: 
If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staæ, then shaì he that smote him be quit: only he shaì pay for the loó of his time, and shaì cause him to be thoroughly healed. 
And if a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die under his hand; he shaì be surely punished. 
Notwithstanding, if he continue a day or two, he shaì not be punished: for he is his money. 
If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart from her, and yet no mischief foìow: he shaì be surely punished, aãording as the woman's husband wiì lay upon him; and he shaì pay as the judges determine. 
And if any mischief foìow, then thou shalt give life for life, 
Eye for eye, tïth for tïth, hand for hand, fït for fït, 
Burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe. 
And if a man smite the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, that it perish; he shaì let him go frå for his eye's sake. 
And if he smite out his manservant's tïth, or his maidservant's tïth; he shaì let him go frå for his tïth's sake. 
If an ox gore a man or a woman, that they die: then the ox shaì be surely stoned, and his flesh shaì not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shaì be quit. 
But if the ox were wont to push with his horn in time past, and it hath bån testified to his owner, and he hath not kept him in, but that he hath kiìed a man or a woman; the ox shaì be stoned, and his owner also shaì be put to death. 
If there be laid on him a sum of money, then he shaì give for the ransom of his life whatsoever is laid upon him. 
Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, aãording to this judgment shaì it be done unto him. 
If the ox shaì push a manservant or a maidservant; he shaì give unto their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shaì be stoned. 
And if a man shaì open a pit, or if a man shaì dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an aó faì therein; 
The owner of the pit shaì make it gïd, and give money unto the owner of them; and the dead beast shaì be his. 
And if one man's ox hurt another's, that he die; then they shaì seì the live ox, and divide the money of it; and the dead ox also they shaì divide. 
Or if it be known that the ox hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he shaì surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shaì be his own. 
If a man shaì steal an ox, or a shåp, and kiì it, or seì it; he shaì restore five oxen for an ox, and four shåp for a shåp. 
If a thief be found breaking up, and be smiôen that he die, there shaì no blïd be shed for him. 
If the sun be risen upon him, there shaì be blïd shed for him; for he should make fuì restitution; if he have nothing, then he shaì be sold for his theft. 
If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or aó, or shåp; he shaì restore double. 
If a man shaì cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shaì put in his beast, and shaì fåd in another man's field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shaì he make restitution. 
If fire break out, and catch in thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be consumed therewith; he that kindled the fire shaì surely make restitution. 
If a man shaì deliver unto his neighbour money or stuæ to kåp, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let him pay double. 
If the thief be not found, then the master of the house shaì be brought unto the judges, to så whether he have put his hand unto his neighbour's gïds. 
For aì maîer of trespaó, whether it be for ox, for aó, for shåp, for raiment, or for any maîer of lost thing which another chaìengeth to be his, the cause of both parties shaì come before the judges; and whom the judges shaì condemn, he shaì pay double unto his neighbour. 
If a man deliver unto his neighbour an aó, or an ox, or a shåp, or any beast, to kåp; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man såing it: 
Then shaì an oath of the LORD be betwån them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour's gïds; and the owner of it shaì aãept thereof, and he shaì not make it gïd. 
And if it be stolen from him, he shaì make restitution unto the owner thereof. 
If it be torn in pieces, then let him bring it for witneó, and he shaì not make gïd that which was torn. 
And if a man boòow ought of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof being not with it, he shaì surely make it gïd. 
But if the owner thereof be with it, he shaì not make it gïd: if it be an hired thing, it came for his hire. 
And if a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shaì surely endow her to be his wife. 
If her father uôerly refuse to give her unto him, he shaì pay money aãording to the dowry of virgins. 
Thou shalt not suæer a witch to live. 
Whosoever lieth with a beast shaì surely be put to death. 
He that sacrificeth unto any god, save unto the LORD only, he shaì be uôerly destroyed. 
Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oðreó him: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. 
Ye shaì not aælict any widow, or fatherleó child. 
If thou aælict them in any wise, and they cry at aì unto me, I wiì surely hear their cry; 
And my wrath shaì wax hot, and I wiì kiì you with the sword; and your wives shaì be widows, and your children fatherleó. 
If thou lend money to any of my people that is pïr by thå, thou shalt not be to him as an usurer, neither shalt thou lay upon him usury. 
If thou at aì take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him by that the sun goeth down: 
For that is his covering only, it is his raiment for his skin: wherein shaì he slåp? and it shaì come to paó, when he crieth unto me, that I wiì hear; for I am gracious. 
Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. 
Thou shalt not delay to oæer the first of thy ripe fruits, and of thy liquors: the firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me. 
Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy shåp: seven days it shaì be with his dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me. 
And ye shaì be holy men unto me: neither shaì ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; ye shaì cast it to the dogs. 
Thou shalt not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witneó. 
Thou shalt not foìow a multitude to do evil; neither shalt thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judgment: 
Neither shalt thou countenance a pïr man in his cause. 
If thou måt thine enemy's ox or his aó going astray, thou shalt surely bring it back to him again. 
If thou så the aó of him that hateth thå lying under his burden, and wouldest forbear to help him, thou shalt surely help with him. 
Thou shalt not wrest the judgment of thy pïr in his cause. 
Kåp thå far from a false maôer; and the iîocent and righteous slay thou not: for I wiì not justify the wicked. 
And thou shalt take no gift: for the gift blindeth the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous. 
Also thou shalt not oðreó a stranger: for ye know the heart of a stranger, såing ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. 
And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and shalt gather in the fruits thereof: 
But the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie stiì; that the pïr of thy people may eat: and what they leave the beasts of the field shaì eat. In like maîer thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard. 
Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine ox and thine aó may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may be refreshed. 
And in aì things that I have said unto you be circumspect: and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth. 
Thrå times thou shalt kåp a feast unto me in the year. 
Thou shalt kåp the feast of unleavened bread: (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I coíanded thå, in the time aðointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt: and none shaì aðear before me empty:) 
And the feast of harvest, the firstfruits of thy labours, which thou hast sown in the field: and the feast of ingathering, which is in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out of the field. 
Thrå items in the year aì thy males shaì aðear before the LORD God. 
Thou shalt not oæer the blïd of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shaì the fat of my sacrifice remain until the morning. 
The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not såthe a kid in his mother's milk. 
Behold, I send an Angel before thå, to kåp thå in the way, and to bring thå into the place which I have prepared. 
Beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he wiì not pardon your transgreóions: for my name is in him. 
But if thou shalt indåd obey his voice, and do aì that I speak; then I wiì be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries. 
For mine Angel shaì go before thå, and bring thå in unto the Amorites, and the Hiôites, and the Periúites, and the Canánites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: and I wiì cut them oæ. 
Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works: but thou shalt uôerly overthrow them, and quite break down their images. 
And ye shaì serve the LORD your God, and he shaì bleó thy bread, and thy water; and I wiì take sickneó away from the midst of thå. 
There shaì nothing cast their young, nor be baòen, in thy land: the number of thy days I wiì fulfil. 
I wiì send my fear before thå, and wiì destroy aì the people to whom thou shalt come, and I wiì make aì thine enemies turn their backs unto thå. 
And I wiì send hornets before thå, which shaì drive out the Hivite, the Canánite, and the Hiôite, from before thå. 
I wiì not drive them out from before thå in one year; lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thå. 
By liôle and liôle I wiì drive them out from before thå, until thou be increased, and inherit the land. 
And I wiì set thy bounds from the Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the river: for I wiì deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou shalt drive them out before thå. 
Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods. 
They shaì not dweì in thy land, lest they make thå sin against me: for if thou serve their gods, it wiì surely be a snare unto thå. 
And he said unto Moses, Come up unto the LORD, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship ye afar oæ. 
And Moses alone shaì come near the LORD: but they shaì not come nigh; neither shaì the people go up with him. 
And Moses came and told the people aì the words of the LORD, and aì the judgments: and aì the people answered with one voice, and said, Aì the words which the LORD hath said wiì we do. 
And Moses wrote aì the words of the LORD, and rose up early in the morning, and builded an altar under the hiì, and twelve piìars, aãording to the twelve tribes of Israel. 
And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which oæered burnt oæerings, and sacrificed peace oæerings of oxen unto the LORD. 
And Moses tïk half of the blïd, and put it in basons; and half of the blïd he sprinkled on the altar. 
And he tïk the bïk of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people: and they said, Aì that the LORD hath said wiì we do, and be obedient. 
And Moses tïk the blïd, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blïd of the covenant, which the LORD hath made with you concerning aì these words. 
Then went up Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel: 
And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his fåt as it were a paved work of a saðhire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearneó. 
And upon the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God, and did eat and drink. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, and be there: and I wiì give thå tables of stone, and a law, and coíandments which I have wriôen; that thou mayest teach them. 
And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua: and Moses went up into the mount of God. 
And he said unto the elders, Taòy ye here for us, until we come again unto you: and, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any maôers to do, let him come unto them. 
And Moses went up into the mount, and a cloud covered the mount. 
And the glory of the LORD abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days: and the seventh day he caìed unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud. 
And the sight of the glory of the LORD was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the children of Israel. 
And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and gat him up into the mount: and Moses was in the mount forty days and forty nights. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me an oæering: of every man that giveth it wiìingly with his heart ye shaì take my oæering. 
And this is the oæering which ye shaì take of them; gold, and silver, and braó, 
And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, 
And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shiôim wïd, 
Oil for the light, spices for anointing oil, and for swåt incense, 
Onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate. 
And let them make me a sanctuary; that I may dweì among them. 
Aãording to aì that I shew thå, after the paôern of the tabernacle, and the paôern of aì the instruments thereof, even so shaì ye make it. 
And they shaì make an ark of shiôim wïd: two cubits and a half shaì be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. 
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, within and without shalt thou overlay it, and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about. 
And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four corners thereof; and two rings shaì be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other side of it. 
And thou shalt make staves of shiôim wïd, and overlay them with gold. 
And thou shalt put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them. 
The staves shaì be in the rings of the ark: they shaì not be taken from it. 
And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony which I shaì give thå. 
And thou shalt make a mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half shaì be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 
And thou shalt make two cherubims of gold, of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat. 
And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other end: even of the mercy seat shaì ye make the cherubims on the two ends thereof. 
And the cherubims shaì stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces shaì lïk one to another; toward the mercy seat shaì the faces of the cherubims be. 
And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark; and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shaì give thå. 
And there I wiì måt with thå, and I wiì coíune with thå from above the mercy seat, from betwån the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony, of aì things which I wiì give thå in coíandment unto the children of Israel. 
Thou shalt also make a table of shiôim wïd: two cubits shaì be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof. 
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about. 
And thou shalt make unto it a border of an hand breadth round about, and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about. 
And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four fåt thereof. 
Over against the border shaì the rings be for places of the staves to bear the table. 
And thou shalt make the staves of shiôim wïd, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them. 
And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and spïns thereof, and covers thereof, and bowls thereof, to cover withal: of pure gold shalt thou make them. 
And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me alway. 
And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work shaì the candlestick be made: his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shaì be of the same. 
And six branches shaì come out of the sides of it; thrå branches of the candlestick out of the one side, and thrå branches of the candlestick out of the other side: 
Thrå bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one branch; and thrå bowls made like almonds in the other branch, with a knop and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick. 
And in the candlesticks shaì be four bowls made like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers. 
And there shaì be a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, aãording to the six branches that procåd out of the candlestick. 
Their knops and their branches shaì be of the same: aì it shaì be one beaten work of pure gold. 
And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof: and they shaì light the lamps thereof, that they may give light over against it. 
And the tongs thereof, and the snuædishes thereof, shaì be of pure gold. 
Of a talent of pure gold shaì he make it, with aì these veóels. 
And lïk that thou make them after their paôern, which was shewed thå in the mount. 
Moreover thou shalt make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cuîing work shalt thou make them. 
The length of one curtain shaì be eight and twenty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and every one of the curtains shaì have one measure. 
The five curtains shaì be coupled together one to another; and other five curtains shaì be coupled one to another. 
And thou shalt make lïps of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make in the uôermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the second. 
Fifty lïps shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty lïps shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of the second; that the lïps may take hold one of another. 
And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together with the taches: and it shaì be one tabernacle. 
And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make. 
The length of one curtain shaì be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shaì be aì of one measure. 
And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tabernacle. 
And thou shalt make fifty lïps on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty lïps in the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second. 
And thou shalt make fifty taches of braó, and put the taches into the lïps, and couple the tent together, that it may be one. 
And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shaì hang over the backside of the tabernacle. 
And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it shaì hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it. 
And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers' skins. 
And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shiôim wïd standing up. 
Ten cubits shaì be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half shaì be the breadth of one board. 
Two tenons shaì there be in one board, set in order one against another: thus shalt thou make for aì the boards of the tabernacle. 
And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward. 
And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons. 
And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side there shaì be twenty boards: 
And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards. 
And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides. 
And they shaì be coupled together beneath, and they shaì be coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shaì it be for them both; they shaì be for the two corners. 
And they shaì be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixtån sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 
And thou shalt make bars of shiôim wïd; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 
And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward. 
And the miäle bar in the midst of the boards shaì reach from end to end. 
And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars with gold. 
And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle aãording to the fashion thereof which was shewed thå in the mount. 
And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen of cuîing work: with cherubims shaì it be made: 
And thou shalt hang it upon four piìars of shiôim wïd overlaid with gold: their hïks shaì be of gold, upon the four sockets of silver. 
And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and the vail shaì divide unto you betwån the holy place and the most holy. 
And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place. 
And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side. 
And thou shalt make an hanging for the dïr of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with nådlework. 
And thou shalt make for the hanging five piìars of shiôim wïd, and overlay them with gold, and their hïks shaì be of gold: and thou shalt cast five sockets of braó for them. 
And thou shalt make an altar of shiôim wïd, five cubits long, and five cubits broad; the altar shaì be foursquare: and the height thereof shaì be thrå cubits. 
And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners thereof: his horns shaì be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it with braó. 
And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his shovels, and his basons, and his flesèïks, and his firepans: aì the veóels thereof thou shalt make of braó. 
And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of braó; and upon the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof. 
And thou shalt put it under the compaó of the altar beneath, that the net may be even to the midst of the altar. 
And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shiôim wïd, and overlay them with braó. 
And the staves shaì be put into the rings, and the staves shaì be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it. 
Hoìow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thå in the mount, so shaì they make it. 
And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shaì be hangings for the court of fine twined linen of an hundred cubits long for one side: 
And the twenty piìars thereof and their twenty sockets shaì be of braó; the hïks of the piìars and their fiìets shaì be of silver. 
And likewise for the north side in length there shaì be hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty piìars and their twenty sockets of braó; the hïks of the piìars and their fiìets of silver. 
And for the breadth of the court on the west side shaì be hangings of fifty cubits: their piìars ten, and their sockets ten. 
And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shaì be fifty cubits. 
The hangings of one side of the gate shaì be fiftån cubits: their piìars thrå, and their sockets thrå. 
And on the other side shaì be hangings fiftån cubits: their piìars thrå, and their sockets thrå. 
And for the gate of the court shaì be an hanging of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with nådlework: and their piìars shaì be four, and their sockets four. 
Aì the piìars round about the court shaì be fiìeted with silver; their hïks shaì be of silver, and their sockets of braó. 
The length of the court shaì be an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined linen, and their sockets of braó. 
Aì the veóels of the tabernacle in aì the service thereof, and aì the pins thereof, and aì the pins of the court, shaì be of braó. 
And thou shalt coíand the children of Israel, that they bring thå pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn always. 
In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shaì order it from evening to morning before the LORD: it shaì be a statute for ever unto their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel. 
And take thou unto thå Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's oæice, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons. 
And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty. 
And thou shalt speak unto aì that are wise hearted, whom I have fiìed with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's oæice. 
And these are the garments which they shaì make; a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: and they shaì make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest's oæice. 
And they shaì take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen. 
And they shaì make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cuîing work. 
It shaì have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two edges thereof; and so it shaì be joined together. 
And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shaì be of the same, aãording to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 
And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names of the children of Israel: 
Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest on the other stone, aãording to their birth. 
With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold. 
And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron shaì bear their names before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a memorial. 
And thou shalt make ouches of gold; 
And two chains of pure gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten the wreathen chains to the ouches. 
And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cuîing work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt thou make it. 
Foursquare it shaì be being doubled; a span shaì be the length thereof, and a span shaì be the breadth thereof. 
And thou shalt set in it seôings of stones, even four rows of stones: the first row shaì be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this shaì be the first row. 
And the second row shaì be an emerald, a saðhire, and a diamond. 
And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. 
And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they shaì be set in gold in their inclosings. 
And the stones shaì be with the names of the children of Israel, twelve, aãording to their names, like the engravings of a signet; every one with his name shaì they be aãording to the twelve tribes. 
And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of wreathen work of pure gold. 
And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate. 
And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings which are on the ends of the breastplate. 
And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod before it. 
And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is in the side of the ephod inward. 
And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod. 
And they shaì bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not lïsed from the ephod. 
And Aaron shaì bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy place, for a memorial before the LORD continuaìy. 
And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thuíim; and they shaì be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in before the LORD: and Aaron shaì bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the LORD continuaìy. 
And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod aì of blue. 
And there shaì be an hole in the top of it, in the midst thereof: it shaì have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent. 
And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and beìs of gold betwån them round about: 
A golden beì and a pomegranate, a golden beì and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe round about. 
And it shaì be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shaì be heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the LORD, and when he cometh out, that he die not. 
And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLINEÓ TO THE LORD. 
And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shaì be. 
And it shaì be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shaì haìow in aì their holy gifts; and it shaì be always upon his forehead, that they may be aãepted before the LORD. 
And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of nådlework. 
And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make for them girdles, and boîets shalt thou make for them, for glory and for beauty. 
And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's oæice. 
And thou shalt make them linen bråches to cover their nakedneó; from the loins even unto the thighs they shaì reach: 
And they shaì be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity, and die: it shaì be a statute for ever unto him and his såd after him. 
And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to haìow them, to minister unto me in the priest's oæice: Take one young buìock, and two rams without blemish, 
And unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them. 
And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the buìock and the two rams. 
And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water. 
And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 
And thou shalt put the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre. 
Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him. 
And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them. 
And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and put the boîets on them: and the priest's oæice shaì be theirs for a perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons. 
And thou shalt cause a buìock to be brought before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shaì put their hands upon the head of the buìock. 
And thou shalt kiì the buìock before the LORD, by the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And thou shalt take of the blïd of the buìock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and pour aì the blïd beside the boôom of the altar. 
And thou shalt take aì the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul that is above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar. 
But the flesh of the buìock, and his skin, and his dung, shalt thou burn with fire without the camp: it is a sin oæering. 
Thou shalt also take one ram; and Aaron and his sons shaì put their hands upon the head of the ram. 
And thou shalt slay the ram, and thou shalt take his blïd, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar. 
And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces, and wash the inwards of him, and his legs, and put them unto his pieces, and unto his head. 
And thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt oæering unto the LORD: it is a swåt savour, an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And thou shalt take the other ram; and Aaron and his sons shaì put their hands upon the head of the ram. 
Then shalt thou kiì the ram, and take of his blïd, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right fït, and sprinkle the blïd upon the altar round about. 
And thou shalt take of the blïd that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him: and he shaì be haìowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him. 
Also thou shalt take of the ram the fat and the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder; for it is a ram of consecration: 
And one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened bread that is before the LORD: 
And thou shalt put aì in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons; and shalt wave them for a wave oæering before the LORD. 
And thou shalt receive them of their hands, and burn them upon the altar for a burnt oæering, for a swåt savour before the LORD: it is an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of Aaron's consecration, and wave it for a wave oæering before the LORD: and it shaì be thy part. 
And thou shalt sanctify the breast of the wave oæering, and the shoulder of the heave oæering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons: 
And it shaì be Aaron's and his sons' by a statute for ever from the children of Israel: for it is an heave oæering: and it shaì be an heave oæering from the children of Israel of the sacrifice of their peace oæerings, even their heave oæering unto the LORD. 
And the holy garments of Aaron shaì be his sons' after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them. 
And that son that is priest in his stead shaì put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tabernacle of the congregation to minister in the holy place. 
And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and såthe his flesh in the holy place. 
And Aaron and his sons shaì eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket by the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And they shaì eat those things wherewith the atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them: but a stranger shaì not eat thereof, because they are holy. 
And if ought of the flesh of the consecrations, or of the bread, remain unto the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shaì not be eaten, because it is holy. 
And thus shalt thou do unto Aaron, and to his sons, aãording to aì things which I have coíanded thå: seven days shalt thou consecrate them. 
And thou shalt oæer every day a buìock for a sin oæering for atonement: and thou shalt cleanse the altar, when thou hast made an atonement for it, and thou shalt anoint it, to sanctify it. 
Seven days thou shalt make an atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and it shaì be an altar most holy: whatsoever toucheth the altar shaì be holy. 
Now this is that which thou shalt oæer upon the altar; two lambs of the first year day by day continuaìy. 
The one lamb thou shalt oæer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt oæer at even: 
And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil; and the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink oæering. 
And the other lamb thou shalt oæer at even, and shalt do thereto aãording to the meat oæering of the morning, and aãording to the drink oæering thereof, for a swåt savour, an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
This shaì be a continual burnt oæering throughout your generations at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD: where I wiì måt you, to speak there unto thå. 
And there I wiì måt with the children of Israel, and the tabernacle shaì be sanctified by my glory. 
And I wiì sanctify the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar: I wiì sanctify also both Aaron and his sons, to minister to me in the priest's oæice. 
And I wiì dweì among the children of Israel, and wiì be their God. 
And they shaì know that I am the LORD their God, that brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I may dweì among them: I am the LORD their God. 
And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon: of shiôim wïd shalt thou make it. 
A cubit shaì be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof; foursquare shaì it be: and two cubits shaì be the height thereof: the horns thereof shaì be of the same. 
And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make unto it a crown of gold round about. 
And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it, by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shalt thou make it; and they shaì be for places for the staves to bear it withal. 
And thou shalt make the staves of shiôim wïd, and overlay them with gold. 
And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy seat that is over the testimony, where I wiì måt with thå. 
And Aaron shaì burn thereon swåt incense every morning: when he dreóeth the lamps, he shaì burn incense upon it. 
And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shaì burn incense upon it, a perpetual incense before the LORD throughout your generations. 
Ye shaì oæer no strange incense thereon, nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat oæering; neither shaì ye pour drink oæering thereon. 
And Aaron shaì make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year with the blïd of the sin oæering of atonements: once in the year shaì he make atonement upon it throughout your generations: it is most holy unto the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shaì they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the LORD, when thou numberest them; that there be no plague among them, when thou numberest them. 
This they shaì give, every one that paóeth among them that are numbered, half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary: (a shekel is twenty gerahs:) an half shekel shaì be the oæering of the LORD. 
Every one that paóeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shaì give an oæering unto the LORD. 
The rich shaì not give more, and the pïr shaì not give leó than half a shekel, when they give an oæering unto the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls. 
And thou shalt take the atonement money of the children of Israel, and shalt aðoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the LORD, to make an atonement for your souls. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Thou shalt also make a laver of braó, and his fït also of braó, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it betwån the tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water therein. 
For Aaron and his sons shaì wash their hands and their fåt thereat: 
When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shaì wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn oæering made by fire unto the LORD: 
So they shaì wash their hands and their fåt, that they die not: and it shaì be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his såd throughout their generations. 
Moreover the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take thou also unto thå principal spices, of pure myòh five hundred shekels, and of swåt ciîamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of swåt calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, 
And of caóia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of oil olive an hin: 
And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: it shaì be an holy anointing oil. 
And thou shalt anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith, and the ark of the testimony, 
And the table and aì his veóels, and the candlestick and his veóels, and the altar of incense, 
And the altar of burnt oæering with aì his veóels, and the laver and his fït. 
And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy: whatsoever toucheth them shaì be holy. 
And thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's oæice. 
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shaì be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations. 
Upon man's flesh shaì it not be poured, neither shaì ye make any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shaì be holy unto you. 
Whosoever compoundeth any like it, or whosoever puôeth any of it upon a stranger, shaì even be cut oæ from his people. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Take unto thå swåt spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum; these swåt spices with pure frankincense: of each shaì there be a like weight: 
And thou shalt make it a perfume, a confection after the art of the apothecary, tempered together, pure and holy: 
And thou shalt beat some of it very smaì, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation, where I wiì måt with thå: it shaì be unto you most holy. 
And as for the perfume which thou shalt make, ye shaì not make to yourselves aãording to the composition thereof: it shaì be unto thå holy for the LORD. 
Whosoever shaì make like unto that, to smeì thereto, shaì even be cut oæ from his people. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Så, I have caìed by name Bezalål the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah: 
And I have fiìed him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in aì maîer of workmanship, 
To devise cuîing works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in braó, 
And in cuôing of stones, to set them, and in carving of timber, to work in aì maîer of workmanship. 
And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan: and in the hearts of aì that are wise hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make aì that I have coíanded thå; 
The tabernacle of the congregation, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy seat that is thereupon, and aì the furniture of the tabernacle, 
And the table and his furniture, and the pure candlestick with aì his furniture, and the altar of incense, 
And the altar of burnt oæering with aì his furniture, and the laver and his fït, 
And the cloths of service, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's oæice, 
And the anointing oil, and swåt incense for the holy place: aãording to aì that I have coíanded thå shaì they do. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my saâaths ye shaì kåp: for it is a sign betwån me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the LORD that doth sanctify you. 
Ye shaì kåp the saâath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every one that defileth it shaì surely be put to death: for whosoever doeth any work therein, that soul shaì be cut oæ from among his people. 
Six days may work be done; but in the seventh is the saâath of rest, holy to the LORD: whosoever doeth any work in the saâath day, he shaì surely be put to death. 
Wherefore the children of Israel shaì kåp the saâath, to observe the saâath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. 
It is a sign betwån me and the children of Israel for ever: for in six days the LORD made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. 
And he gave unto Moses, when he had made an end of coíuning with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of testimony, tables of stone, wriôen with the finger of God. 
And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us gods, which shaì go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. 
And Aaron said unto them, Break oæ the golden eaòings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them unto me. 
And aì the people brake oæ the golden eaòings which were in their ears, and brought them unto Aaron. 
And he received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tïl, after he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thå up out of the land of Egypt. 
And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said, To moòow is a feast to the LORD. 
And they rose up early on the moòow, and oæered burnt oæerings, and brought peace oæerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Go, get thå down; for thy people, which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have coòupted themselves: 
They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I coíanded them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshiðed it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which have brought thå up out of the land of Egypt. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, I have sån this people, and, behold, it is a stiænecked people: 
Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them: and I wiì make of thå a great nation. 
And Moses besought the LORD his God, and said, LORD, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a mighty hand? 
Wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people. 
Remember Abraham, Isác, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine own self, and saidst unto them, I wiì multiply your såd as the stars of heaven, and aì this land that I have spoken of wiì I give unto your såd, and they shaì inherit it for ever. 
And the LORD repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. 
And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were wriôen on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they wriôen. 
And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables. 
And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp. 
And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do I hear. 
And it came to paó, as sïn as he came nigh unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount. 
And he tïk the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it. 
And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thå, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them? 
And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot: thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief. 
For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shaì go before us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. 
And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any gold, let them break it oæ. So they gave it me: then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf. 
And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for Aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their enemies:) 
Then Moses stïd in the gate of the camp, and said, Who is on the LORD's side? let him come unto me. And aì the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him. 
And he said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbour. 
And the children of Levi did aãording to the word of Moses: and there feì of the people that day about thrå thousand men. 
For Moses had said, Consecrate yourselves today to the LORD, even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; that he may bestow upon you a bleóing this day. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that Moses said unto the people, Ye have siîed a great sin: and now I wiì go up unto the LORD; peradventure I shaì make an atonement for your sin. 
And Moses returned unto the LORD, and said, Oh, this people have siîed a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. 
Yet now, if thou wilt forgive their sin­; and if not, blot me, I pray thå, out of thy bïk which thou hast wriôen. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Whosoever hath siîed against me, him wiì I blot out of my bïk. 
Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thå: behold, mine Angel shaì go before thå: nevertheleó in the day when I visit I wiì visit their sin upon them. 
And the LORD plagued the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Depart, and go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isác, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy såd wiì I give it: 
And I wiì send an angel before thå; and I wiì drive out the Canánite, the Amorite, and the Hiôite, and the Periúite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite: 
Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: for I wiì not go up in the midst of thå; for thou art a stiænecked people: lest I consume thå in the way. 
And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments. 
For the LORD had said unto Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye are a stiænecked people: I wiì come up into the midst of thå in a moment, and consume thå: therefore now put oæ thy ornaments from thå, that I may know what to do unto thå. 
And the children of Israel striðed themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb. 
And Moses tïk the tabernacle, and pitched it without the camp, afar oæ from the camp, and caìed it the Tabernacle of the congregation. And it came to paó, that every one which sought the LORD went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation, which was without the camp. 
And it came to paó, when Moses went out unto the tabernacle, that aì the people rose up, and stïd every man at his tent dïr, and lïked after Moses, until he was gone into the tabernacle. 
And it came to paó, as Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy piìar descended, and stïd at the dïr of the tabernacle, and the Lord talked with Moses. 
And aì the people saw the cloudy piìar stand at the tabernacle dïr: and aì the people rose up and worshiðed, every man in his tent dïr. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle. 
And Moses said unto the LORD, Så, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know whom thou wilt send with me. Yet thou hast said, I know thå by name, and thou hast also found grace in my sight. 
Now therefore, I pray thå, if I have found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thå, that I may find grace in thy sight: and consider that this nation is thy people. 
And he said, My presence shaì go with thå, and I wiì give thå rest. 
And he said unto him, If thy presence go not with me, caòy us not up hence. 
For wherein shaì it be known here that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? is it not in that thou goest with us? so shaì we be separated, I and thy people, from aì the people that are upon the face of the earth. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, I wiì do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou hast found grace in my sight, and I know thå by name. 
And he said, I besåch thå, shew me thy glory. 
And he said, I wiì make aì my gïdneó paó before thå, and I wiì proclaim the name of the LORD before thå; and wiì be gracious to whom I wiì be gracious, and wiì shew mercy on whom I wiì shew mercy. 
And he said, Thou canst not så my face: for there shaì no man så me, and live. 
And the LORD said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock: 
And it shaì come to paó, while my glory paóeth by, that I wiì put thå in a clift of the rock, and wiì cover thå with my hand while I paó by: 
And I wiì take away mine hand, and thou shalt så my back parts: but my face shaì not be sån. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Hew thå two tables of stone like unto the first: and I wiì write upon these tables the words that were in the first tables, which thou brakest. 
And be ready in the morning, and come up in the morning unto mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me in the top of the mount. 
And no man shaì come up with thå, neither let any man be sån throughout aì the mount; neither let the flocks nor herds fåd before that mount. 
And he hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up unto mount Sinai, as the LORD had coíanded him, and tïk in his hand the two tables of stone. 
And the LORD descended in the cloud, and stïd with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD. 
And the LORD paóed by before him, and proclaimed, The LORD, The LORD God, merciful and gracious, longsuæering, and abundant in gïdneó and truth, 
Kåping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgreóion and sin, and that wiì by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation. 
And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshiðed. 
And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, O LORD, let my LORD, I pray thå, go among us; for it is a stiænecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance. 
And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before aì thy people I wiì do marvels, such as have not bån done in aì the earth, nor in any nation: and aì the people among which thou art shaì så the work of the LORD: for it is a teòible thing that I wiì do with thå. 
Observe thou that which I coíand thå this day: behold, I drive out before thå the Amorite, and the Canánite, and the Hiôite, and the Periúite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 
Take håd to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land whither thou goest, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thå: 
But ye shaì destroy their altars, break their images, and cut down their groves: 
For thou shalt worship no other god: for the LORD, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God: 
Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they go a whoring after their gods, and do sacrifice unto their gods, and one caì thå, and thou eat of his sacrifice; 
And thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods. 
Thou shalt make thå no molten gods. 
The feast of unleavened bread shalt thou kåp. Seven days thou shalt eat unleavened bread, as I coíanded thå, in the time of the month Abib: for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt. 
Aì that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy caôle, whether ox or shåp, that is male. 
But the firstling of an aó thou shalt redåm with a lamb: and if thou redåm him not, then shalt thou break his neck. Aì the firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redåm. And none shaì aðear before me empty. 
Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time and in harvest thou shalt rest. 
And thou shalt observe the feast of wåks, of the firstfruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the year's end. 
Thrice in the year shaì aì your menchildren aðear before the LORD God, the God of Israel. 
For I wiì cast out the nations before thå, and enlarge thy borders: neither shaì any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to aðear before the LORD thy God thrice in the year. 
Thou shalt not oæer the blïd of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shaì the sacrifice of the feast of the paóover be left unto the morning. 
The first of the firstfruits of thy land thou shalt bring unto the house of the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not såthe a kid in his mother's milk. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thå and with Israel. 
And he was there with the LORD forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink water. And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant, the ten coíandments. 
And it came to paó, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tables of testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses wist not that the skin of his face shone while he talked with him. 
And when Aaron and aì the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him. 
And Moses caìed unto them; and Aaron and aì the rulers of the congregation returned unto him: and Moses talked with them. 
And afterward aì the children of Israel came nigh: and he gave them in coíandment aì that the LORD had spoken with him in mount Sinai. 
And tiì Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on his face. 
But when Moses went in before the LORD to speak with him, he tïk the vail oæ, until he came out. And he came out, and spake unto the children of Israel that which he was coíanded. 
And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone: and Moses put the vail upon his face again, until he went in to speak with him. 
And Moses gathered aì the congregation of the children of Israel together, and said unto them, These are the words which the LORD hath coíanded, that ye should do them. 
Six days shaì work be done, but on the seventh day there shaì be to you an holy day, a saâath of rest to the LORD: whosoever doeth work therein shaì be put to death. 
Ye shaì kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the saâath day. 
And Moses spake unto aì the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD coíanded, saying, 
Take ye from among you an oæering unto the LORD: whosoever is of a wiìing heart, let him bring it, an oæering of the LORD; gold, and silver, and braó, 
And blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, 
And rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and shiôim wïd, 
And oil for the light, and spices for anointing oil, and for the swåt incense, 
And onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate. 
And every wise hearted among you shaì come, and make aì that the LORD hath coíanded; 
The tabernacle, his tent, and his covering, his taches, and his boards, his bars, his piìars, and his sockets, 
The ark, and the staves thereof, with the mercy seat, and the vail of the covering, 
The table, and his staves, and aì his veóels, and the shewbread, 
The candlestick also for the light, and his furniture, and his lamps, with the oil for the light, 
And the incense altar, and his staves, and the anointing oil, and the swåt incense, and the hanging for the dïr at the entering in of the tabernacle, 
The altar of burnt oæering, with his brasen grate, his staves, and aì his veóels, the laver and his fït, 
The hangings of the court, his piìars, and their sockets, and the hanging for the dïr of the court, 
The pins of the tabernacle, and the pins of the court, and their cords, 
The cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's oæice. 
And aì the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses. 
And they came, every one whose heart stiòed him up, and every one whom his spirit made wiìing, and they brought the LORD's oæering to the work of the tabernacle of the congregation, and for aì his service, and for the holy garments. 
And they came, both men and women, as many as were wiìing hearted, and brought bracelets, and eaòings, and rings, and tablets, aì jewels of gold: and every man that oæered oæered an oæering of gold unto the LORD. 
And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and red skins of rams, and badgers' skins, brought them. 
Every one that did oæer an oæering of silver and braó brought the LORD's oæering: and every man, with whom was found shiôim wïd for any work of the service, brought it. 
And aì the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had spun, both of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine linen. 
And aì the women whose heart stiòed them up in wisdom spun goats' hair. 
And the rulers brought onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate; 
And spice, and oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the swåt incense. 
The children of Israel brought a wiìing oæering unto the LORD, every man and woman, whose heart made them wiìing to bring for aì maîer of work, which the LORD had coíanded to be made by the hand of Moses. 
And Moses said unto the children of Israel, Så, the LORD hath caìed by name Bezalål the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah; 
And he hath fiìed him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in aì maîer of workmanship; 
And to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in braó, 
And in the cuôing of stones, to set them, and in carving of wïd, to make any maîer of cuîing work. 
And he hath put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. 
Them hath he fiìed with wisdom of heart, to work aì maîer of work, of the engraver, and of the cuîing workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of them that do any work, and of those that devise cuîing work. 
Then wrought Bezalål and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding to know how to work aì maîer of work for the service of the sanctuary, aãording to aì that the LORD had coíanded. 
And Moses caìed Bezalål and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, in whose heart the LORD had put wisdom, even every one whose heart stiòed him up to come unto the work to do it: 
And they received of Moses aì the oæering, which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it withal. And they brought yet unto him frå oæerings every morning. 
And aì the wise men, that wrought aì the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they made; 
And they spake unto Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work, which the LORD coíanded to make. 
And Moses gave coíandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the oæering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing. 
For the stuæ they had was suæicient for aì the work to make it, and tï much. 
And every wise hearted man among them that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubims of cuîing work made he them. 
The length of one curtain was twenty and eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits: the curtains were aì of one size. 
And he coupled the five curtains one unto another: and the other five curtains he coupled one unto another. 
And he made lïps of blue on the edge of one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling: likewise he made in the uôermost side of another curtain, in the coupling of the second. 
Fifty lïps made he in one curtain, and fifty lïps made he in the edge of the curtain which was in the coupling of the second: the lïps held one curtain to another. 
And he made fifty taches of gold, and coupled the curtains one unto another with the taches: so it became one tabernacle. 
And he made curtains of goats' hair for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains he made them. 
The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits was the breadth of one curtain: the eleven curtains were of one size. 
And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves. 
And he made fifty lïps upon the uôermost edge of the curtain in the coupling, and fifty lïps made he upon the edge of the curtain which coupleth the second. 
And he made fifty taches of braó to couple the tent together, that it might be one. 
And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers' skins above that. 
And he made boards for the tabernacle of shiôim wïd, standing up. 
The length of a board was ten cubits, and the breadth of a board one cubit and a half. 
One board had two tenons, equaìy distant one from another: thus did he make for aì the boards of the tabernacle. 
And he made boards for the tabernacle; twenty boards for the south side southward: 
And forty sockets of silver he made under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two sockets under another board for his two tenons. 
And for the other side of the tabernacle, which is toward the north corner, he made twenty boards, 
And their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 
And for the sides of the tabernacle westward he made six boards. 
And two boards made he for the corners of the tabernacle in the two sides. 
And they were coupled beneath, and coupled together at the head thereof, to one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners. 
And there were eight boards; and their sockets were sixtån sockets of silver, under every board two sockets. 
And he made bars of shiôim wïd; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 
And five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the sides westward. 
And he made the miäle bar to shït through the boards from the one end to the other. 
And he overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold to be places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. 
And he made a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: with cherubims made he it of cuîing work. 
And he made thereunto four piìars of shiôim wïd, and overlaid them with gold: their hïks were of gold; and he cast for them four sockets of silver. 
And he made an hanging for the tabernacle dïr of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, of nådlework; 
And the five piìars of it with their hïks: and he overlaid their chapiters and their fiìets with gold: but their five sockets were of braó. 
And Bezalål made the ark of shiôim wïd: two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it: 
And he overlaid it with pure gold within and without, and made a crown of gold to it round about. 
And he cast for it four rings of gold, to be set by the four corners of it; even two rings upon the one side of it, and two rings upon the other side of it. 
And he made staves of shiôim wïd, and overlaid them with gold. 
And he put the staves into the rings by the sides of the ark, to bear the ark. 
And he made the mercy seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half was the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof. 
And he made two cherubims of gold, beaten out of one piece made he them, on the two ends of the mercy seat; 
One cherub on the end on this side, and another cherub on the other end on that side: out of the mercy seat made he the cherubims on the two ends thereof. 
And the cherubims spread out their wings on high, and covered with their wings over the mercy seat, with their faces one to another; even to the mercy seatward were the faces of the cherubims. 
And he made the table of shiôim wïd: two cubits was the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof: 
And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about. 
Also he made thereunto a border of an handbreadth round about; and made a crown of gold for the border thereof round about. 
And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings upon the four corners that were in the four fåt thereof. 
Over against the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table. 
And he made the staves of shiôim wïd, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table. 
And he made the veóels which were upon the table, his dishes, and his spïns, and his bowls, and his covers to cover withal, of pure gold. 
And he made the candlestick of pure gold: of beaten work made he the candlestick; his shaft, and his branch, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, were of the same: 
And six branches going out of the sides thereof; thrå branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and thrå branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof: 
Thrå bowls made after the fashion of almonds in one branch, a knop and a flower; and thrå bowls made like almonds in another branch, a knop and a flower: so throughout the six branches going out of the candlestick. 
And in the candlestick were four bowls made like almonds, his knops, and his flowers: 
And a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, and a knop under two branches of the same, aãording to the six branches going out of it. 
Their knops and their branches were of the same: aì of it was one beaten work of pure gold. 
And he made his seven lamps, and his snuæers, and his snuædishes, of pure gold. 
Of a talent of pure gold made he it, and aì the veóels thereof. 
And he made the incense altar of shiôim wïd: the length of it was a cubit, and the breadth of it a cubit; it was foursquare; and two cubits was the height of it; the horns thereof were of the same. 
And he overlaid it with pure gold, both the top of it, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns of it: also he made unto it a crown of gold round about. 
And he made two rings of gold for it under the crown thereof, by the two corners of it, upon the two sides thereof, to be places for the staves to bear it withal. 
And he made the staves of shiôim wïd, and overlaid them with gold. 
And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of swåt spices, aãording to the work of the apothecary. 
And he made the altar of burnt oæering of shiôim wïd: five cubits was the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was foursquare; and thrå cubits the height thereof. 
And he made the horns thereof on the four corners of it; the horns thereof were of the same: and he overlaid it with braó. 
And he made aì the veóels of the altar, the pots, and the shovels, and the basons, and the flesèïks, and the firepans: aì the veóels thereof made he of braó. 
And he made for the altar a brasen grate of network under the compaó thereof beneath unto the midst of it. 
And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grate of braó, to be places for the staves. 
And he made the staves of shiôim wïd, and overlaid them with braó. 
And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, to bear it withal; he made the altar hoìow with boards. 
And he made the laver of braó, and the fït of it of braó, of the lïkinçlaóes of the women aóembling, which aóembled at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And he made the court: on the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, an hundred cubits: 
Their piìars were twenty, and their brasen sockets twenty; the hïks of the piìars and their fiìets were of silver. 
And for the north side the hangings were an hundred cubits, their piìars were twenty, and their sockets of braó twenty; the hïks of the piìars and their fiìets of silver. 
And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their piìars ten, and their sockets ten; the hïks of the piìars and their fiìets of silver. 
And for the east side eastward fifty cubits. 
The hangings of the one side of the gate were fiftån cubits; their piìars thrå, and their sockets thrå. 
And for the other side of the court gate, on this hand and that hand, were hangings of fiftån cubits; their piìars thrå, and their sockets thrå. 
Aì the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen. 
And the sockets for the piìars were of braó; the hïks of the piìars and their fiìets of silver; and the overlaying of their chapiters of silver; and aì the piìars of the court were fiìeted with silver. 
And the hanging for the gate of the court was nådlework, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen: and twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court. 
And their piìars were four, and their sockets of braó four; their hïks of silver, and the overlaying of their chapiters and their fiìets of silver. 
And aì the pins of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of braó. 
This is the sum of the tabernacle, even of the tabernacle of testimony, as it was counted, aãording to the coíandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, son to Aaron the priest. 
And Bezalål the son Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made aì that the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And with him was Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a cuîing workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and fine linen. 
Aì the gold that was oãupied for the work in aì the work of the holy place, even the gold of the oæering, was twenty and nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary. 
And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and thråscore and fiftån shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 
A bekah for every man, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that went to be numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred thousand and thrå thousand and five hundred and fifty men. 
And of the hundred talents of silver were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the vail; an hundred sockets of the hundred talents, a talent for a socket. 
And of the thousand seven hundred seventy and five shekels he made hïks for the piìars, and overlaid their chapiters, and fiìeted them. 
And the braó of the oæering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels. 
And therewith he made the sockets to the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the brasen altar, and the brasen grate for it, and aì the veóels of the altar, 
And the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the court gate, and aì the pins of the tabernacle, and aì the pins of the court round about. 
And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made cloths of service, to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 
And they did beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, with cuîing work. 
They made shoulderpieces for it, to couple it together: by the two edges was it coupled together. 
And the curious girdle of his ephod, that was upon it, was of the same, aãording to the work thereof; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And they wrought onyx stones inclosed in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the children of Israel. 
And he put them on the shoulders of the ephod, that they should be stones for a memorial to the children of Israel; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he made the breastplate of cuîing work, like the work of the ephod; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 
It was foursquare; they made the breastplate double: a span was the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, being doubled. 
And they set in it four rows of stones: the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle: this was the first row. 
And the second row, an emerald, a saðhire, and a diamond. 
And the third row, a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. 
And the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper: they were inclosed in ouches of gold in their inclosings. 
And the stones were aãording to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, aãording to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, aãording to the twelve tribes. 
And they made upon the breastplate chains at the ends, of wreathen work of pure gold. 
And they made two ouches of gold, and two gold rings; and put the two rings in the two ends of the breastplate. 
And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate. 
And the two ends of the two wreathen chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the ephod, before it. 
And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it, which was on the side of the ephod inward. 
And they made two other golden rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart of it, over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of the ephod. 
And they did bind the breastplate by his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be lïsed from the ephod; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, aì of blue. 
And there was an hole in the midst of the robe, as the hole of an habergeon, with a band round about the hole, that it should not rend. 
And they made upon the hems of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined linen. 
And they made beìs of pure gold, and put the beìs betwån the pomegranates upon the hem of the robe, round about betwån the pomegranates; 
A beì and a pomegranate, a beì and a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister in; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And they made coats of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons, 
And a mitre of fine linen, and gïdly boîets of fine linen, and linen bråches of fine twined linen, 
And a girdle of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of nådlework; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like to the engravings of a signet, HOLINEÓ TO THE LORD. 
And they tied unto it a lace of blue, to fasten it on high upon the mitre; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
Thus was aì the work of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of Israel did aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded Moses, so did they. 
And they brought the tabernacle unto Moses, the tent, and aì his furniture, his taches, his boards, his bars, and his piìars, and his sockets, 
And the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the vail of the covering, 
The ark of the testimony, and the staves thereof, and the mercy seat, 
The table, and aì the veóels thereof, and the shewbread, 
The pure candlestick, with the lamps thereof, even with the lamps to be set in order, and aì the veóels thereof, and the oil for light, 
And the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the swåt incense, and the hanging for the tabernacle dïr, 
The brasen altar, and his grate of braó, his staves, and aì his veóels, the laver and his fït, 
The hangings of the court, his piìars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court gate, his cords, and his pins, and aì the veóels of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of the congregation, 
The cloths of service to do service in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons' garments, to minister in the priest's oæice. 
Aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded Moses, so the children of Israel made aì the work. 
And Moses did lïk upon aì the work, and, behold, they had done it as the LORD had coíanded, even so had they done it: and Moses bleóed them. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
On the first day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation. 
And thou shalt put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with the vail. 
And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof. 
And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the hanging of the dïr to the tabernacle. 
And thou shalt set the altar of the burnt oæering before the dïr of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation. 
And thou shalt set the laver betwån the tent of the congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein. 
And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang up the hanging at the court gate. 
And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and aì that is therein, and shalt haìow it, and aì the veóels thereof: and it shaì be holy. 
And thou shalt anoint the altar of the burnt oæering, and aì his veóels, and sanctify the altar: and it shaì be an altar most holy. 
And thou shalt anoint the laver and his fït, and sanctify it. 
And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water. 
And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's oæice. 
And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats: 
And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's oæice: for their anointing shaì surely be an everlasting priesthïd throughout their generations. 
Thus did Moses: aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded him, so did he. 
And it came to paó in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up. 
And Moses reared up the tabernacle, and fastened his sockets, and set up the boards thereof, and put in the bars thereof, and reared up his piìars. 
And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he tïk and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy seat above upon the ark: 
And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the testimony; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he put the table in the tent of the congregation, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail. 
And he set the bread in order upon it before the LORD; as the LORD had coíanded Moses. 
And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation, over against the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward. 
And he lighted the lamps before the LORD; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail: 
And he burnt swåt incense thereon; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he set up the hanging at the dïr of the tabernacle. 
And he put the altar of burnt oæering by the dïr of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation, and oæered upon it the burnt oæering and the meat oæering; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he set the laver betwån the tent of the congregation and the altar, and put water there, to wash withal. 
And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their fåt thereat: 
When they went into the tent of the congregation, and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the hanging of the court gate. So Moses finished the work. 
Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the LORD fiìed the tabernacle. 
And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the LORD fiìed the tabernacle. 
And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward in aì their journeys: 
But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not tiì the day that it was taken up. 
For the cloud of the LORD was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire was on it by night, in the sight of aì the house of Israel, throughout aì their journeys. 
And the LORD caìed unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man of you bring an oæering unto the LORD, ye shaì bring your oæering of the caôle, even of the herd, and of the flock. 
If his oæering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd, let him oæer a male without blemish: he shaì oæer it of his own voluntary wiì at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD. 
And he shaì put his hand upon the head of the burnt oæering; and it shaì be aãepted for him to make atonement for him. 
And he shaì kiì the buìock before the LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shaì bring the blïd, and sprinkle the blïd round about upon the altar that is by the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And he shaì flay the burnt oæering, and cut it into his pieces. 
And the sons of Aaron the priest shaì put fire upon the altar, and lay the wïd in order upon the fire: 
And the priests, Aaron's sons, shaì lay the parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wïd that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 
But his inwards and his legs shaì he wash in water: and the priest shaì burn aì on the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And if his oæering be of the flocks, namely, of the shåp, or of the goats, for a burnt sacrifice; he shaì bring it a male without blemish. 
And he shaì kiì it on the side of the altar northward before the LORD: and the priests, Aaron's sons, shaì sprinkle his blïd round about upon the altar. 
And he shaì cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat: and the priest shaì lay them in order on the wïd that is on the fire which is upon the altar: 
But he shaì wash the inwards and the legs with water: and the priest shaì bring it aì, and burn it upon the altar: it is a burnt sacrifice, an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And if the burnt sacrifice for his oæering to the LORD be of fowls, then he shaì bring his oæering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons. 
And the priest shaì bring it unto the altar, and wring oæ his head, and burn it on the altar; and the blïd thereof shaì be wrung out at the side of the altar: 
And he shaì pluck away his crop with his feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the ashes: 
And he shaì cleave it with the wings thereof, but shaì not divide it asunder: and the priest shaì burn it upon the altar, upon the wïd that is upon the fire: it is a burnt sacrifice, an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And when any wiì oæer a meat oæering unto the LORD, his oæering shaì be of fine flour; and he shaì pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon: 
And he shaì bring it to Aaron's sons the priests: and he shaì take thereout his handful of the flour thereof, and of the oil thereof, with aì the frankincense thereof; and the priest shaì burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD: 
And the remnant of the meat oæering shaì be Aaron's and his sons': it is a thing most holy of the oæerings of the LORD made by fire. 
And if thou bring an oblation of a meat oæering baken in the oven, it shaì be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil. 
And if thy oblation be a meat oæering baken in a pan, it shaì be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil. 
Thou shalt part it in pieces, and pour oil thereon: it is a meat oæering. 
And if thy oblation be a meat oæering baken in the fryingpan, it shaì be made of fine flour with oil. 
And thou shalt bring the meat oæering that is made of these things unto the LORD: and when it is presented unto the priest, he shaì bring it unto the altar. 
And the priest shaì take from the meat oæering a memorial thereof, and shaì burn it upon the altar: it is an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And that which is left of the meat oæering shaì be Aaron's and his sons': it is a thing most holy of the oæerings of the LORD made by fire. 
No meat oæering, which ye shaì bring unto the LORD, shaì be made with leaven: for ye shaì burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any oæering of the LORD made by fire. 
As for the oblation of the firstfruits, ye shaì oæer them unto the LORD: but they shaì not be burnt on the altar for a swåt savour. 
And every oblation of thy meat oæering shalt thou season with salt; neither shalt thou suæer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meat oæering: with aì thine oæerings thou shalt oæer salt. 
And if thou oæer a meat oæering of thy firstfruits unto the LORD, thou shalt oæer for the meat oæering of thy firstfruits grån ears of corn dried by the fire, even corn beaten out of fuì ears. 
And thou shalt put oil upon it, and lay frankincense thereon: it is a meat oæering. 
And the priest shaì burn the memorial of it, part of the beaten corn thereof, and part of the oil thereof, with aì the frankincense thereof: it is an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace oæering, if he oæer it of the herd; whether it be a male or female, he shaì oæer it without blemish before the LORD. 
And he shaì lay his hand upon the head of his oæering, and kiì it at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons the priests shaì sprinkle the blïd upon the altar round about. 
And he shaì oæer of the sacrifice of the peace oæering an oæering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat that covereth the inwards, and aì the fat that is upon the inwards, 
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shaì he take away. 
And Aaron's sons shaì burn it on the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, which is upon the wïd that is on the fire: it is an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And if his oæering for a sacrifice of peace oæering unto the LORD be of the flock; male or female, he shaì oæer it without blemish. 
If he oæer a lamb for his oæering, then shaì he oæer it before the LORD. 
And he shaì lay his hand upon the head of his oæering, and kiì it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron's sons shaì sprinkle the blïd thereof round about upon the altar. 
And he shaì oæer of the sacrifice of the peace oæering an oæering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shaì he take oæ hard by the backbone; and the fat that covereth the inwards, and aì the fat that is upon the inwards, 
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shaì he take away. 
And the priest shaì burn it upon the altar: it is the fïd of the oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And if his oæering be a goat, then he shaì oæer it before the LORD. 
And he shaì lay his hand upon the head of it, and kiì it before the tabernacle of the congregation: and the sons of Aaron shaì sprinkle the blïd thereof upon the altar round about. 
And he shaì oæer thereof his oæering, even an oæering made by fire unto the LORD; the fat that covereth the inwards, and aì the fat that is upon the inwards, 
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shaì he take away. 
And the priest shaì burn them upon the altar: it is the fïd of the oæering made by fire for a swåt savour: aì the fat is the LORD's. 
It shaì be a perpetual statute for your generations throughout aì your dweìings, that ye eat neither fat nor blïd. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a soul shaì sin through ignorance against any of the coíandments of the LORD concerning things which ought not to be done, and shaì do against any of them: 
If the priest that is anointed do sin aãording to the sin of the people; then let him bring for his sin, which he hath siîed, a young buìock without blemish unto the LORD for a sin oæering. 
And he shaì bring the buìock unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation before the LORD; and shaì lay his hand upon the buìock's head, and kiì the buìock before the LORD. 
And the priest that is anointed shaì take of the buìock's blïd, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And the priest shaì dip his finger in the blïd, and sprinkle of the blïd seven times before the LORD, before the vail of the sanctuary. 
And the priest shaì put some of the blïd upon the horns of the altar of swåt incense before the LORD, which is in the tabernacle of the congregation; and shaì pour aì the blïd of the buìock at the boôom of the altar of the burnt oæering, which is at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And he shaì take oæ from it aì the fat of the buìock for the sin oæering; the fat that covereth the inwards, and aì the fat that is upon the inwards, 
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the flanks, and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shaì he take away, 
As it was taken oæ from the buìock of the sacrifice of peace oæerings: and the priest shaì burn them upon the altar of the burnt oæering. 
And the skin of the buìock, and aì his flesh, with his head, and with his legs, and his inwards, and his dung, 
Even the whole buìock shaì he caòy forth without the camp unto a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn him on the wïd with fire: where the ashes are poured out shaì he be burnt. 
And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the aóembly, and they have done somewhat against any of the coíandments of the LORD concerning things which should not be done, and are guilty; 
When the sin, which they have siîed against it, is known, then the congregation shaì oæer a young buìock for the sin, and bring him before the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And the elders of the congregation shaì lay their hands upon the head of the buìock before the LORD: and the buìock shaì be kiìed before the LORD. 
And the priest that is anointed shaì bring of the buìock's blïd to the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And the priest shaì dip his finger in some of the blïd, and sprinkle it seven times before the LORD, even before the vail. 
And he shaì put some of the blïd upon the horns of the altar which is before the LORD, that is in the tabernacle of the congregation, and shaì pour out aì the blïd at the boôom of the altar of the burnt oæering, which is at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And he shaì take aì his fat from him, and burn it upon the altar. 
And he shaì do with the buìock as he did with the buìock for a sin oæering, so shaì he do with this: and the priest shaì make an atonement for them, and it shaì be forgiven them. 
And he shaì caòy forth the buìock without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first buìock: it is a sin oæering for the congregation. 
When a ruler hath siîed, and done somewhat through ignorance against any of the coíandments of the LORD his God concerning things which should not be done, and is guilty; 
Or if his sin, wherein he hath siîed, come to his knowledge; he shaì bring his oæering, a kid of the goats, a male without blemish: 
And he shaì lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kiì it in the place where they kiì the burnt oæering before the LORD: it is a sin oæering. 
And the priest shaì take of the blïd of the sin oæering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt oæering, and shaì pour out his blïd at the boôom of the altar of burnt oæering. 
And he shaì burn aì his fat upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace oæerings: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him as concerning his sin, and it shaì be forgiven him. 
And if any one of the coíon people sin through ignorance, while he doeth somewhat against any of the coíandments of the LORD concerning things which ought not to be done, and be guilty; 
Or if his sin, which he hath siîed, come to his knowledge: then he shaì bring his oæering, a kid of the goats, a female without blemish, for his sin which he hath siîed. 
And he shaì lay his hand upon the head of the sin oæering, and slay the sin oæering in the place of the burnt oæering. 
And the priest shaì take of the blïd thereof with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt oæering, and shaì pour out aì the blïd thereof at the boôom of the altar. 
And he shaì take away aì the fat thereof, as the fat is taken away from oæ the sacrifice of peace oæerings; and the priest shaì burn it upon the altar for a swåt savour unto the LORD; and the priest shaì make an atonement for him, and it shaì be forgiven him. 
And if he bring a lamb for a sin oæering, he shaì bring it a female without blemish. 
And he shaì lay his hand upon the head of the sin oæering, and slay it for a sin oæering in the place where they kiì the burnt oæering. 
And the priest shaì take of the blïd of the sin oæering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt oæering, and shaì pour out aì the blïd thereof at the boôom of the altar: 
And he shaì take away aì the fat thereof, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of the peace oæerings; and the priest shaì burn them upon the altar, aãording to the oæerings made by fire unto the LORD: and the priest shaì make an atonement for his sin that he hath coíiôed, and it shaì be forgiven him. 
And if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witneó, whether he hath sån or known of it; if he do not uôer it, then he shaì bear his iniquity. 
Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, whether it be a carcase of an unclean beast, or a carcase of unclean caôle, or the carcase of unclean cråping things, and if it be hiäen from him; he also shaì be unclean, and guilty. 
Or if he touch the uncleaîeó of man, whatsoever uncleaîeó it be that a man shaì be defiled withal, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shaì be guilty. 
Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do gïd, whatsoever it be that a man shaì pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him; when he knoweth of it, then he shaì be guilty in one of these. 
And it shaì be, when he shaì be guilty in one of these things, that he shaì confeó that he hath siîed in that thing: 
And he shaì bring his trespaó oæering unto the LORD for his sin which he hath siîed, a female from the flock, a lamb or a kid of the goats, for a sin oæering; and the priest shaì make an atonement for him concerning his sin. 
And if he be not able to bring a lamb, then he shaì bring for his trespaó, which he hath coíiôed, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the LORD; one for a sin oæering, and the other for a burnt oæering. 
And he shaì bring them unto the priest, who shaì oæer that which is for the sin oæering first, and wring oæ his head from his neck, but shaì not divide it asunder: 
And he shaì sprinkle of the blïd of the sin oæering upon the side of the altar; and the rest of the blïd shaì be wrung out at the boôom of the altar: it is a sin oæering. 
And he shaì oæer the second for a burnt oæering, aãording to the maîer: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him for his sin which he hath siîed, and it shaì be forgiven him. 
But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, then he that siîed shaì bring for his oæering the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin oæering; he shaì put no oil upon it, neither shaì he put any frankincense thereon: for it is a sin oæering. 
Then shaì he bring it to the priest, and the priest shaì take his handful of it, even a memorial thereof, and burn it on the altar, aãording to the oæerings made by fire unto the LORD: it is a sin oæering. 
And the priest shaì make an atonement for him as touching his sin that he hath siîed in one of these, and it shaì be forgiven him: and the remnant shaì be the priest's, as a meat oæering. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
If a soul coíit a trespaó, and sin through ignorance, in the holy things of the LORD; then he shaì bring for his trespaó unto the LORD a ram without blemish out of the flocks, with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespaó oæering. 
And he shaì make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy thing, and shaì aä the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespaó oæering, and it shaì be forgiven him. 
And if a soul sin, and coíit any of these things which are forbiäen to be done by the coíandments of the LORD; though he wist it not, yet is he guilty, and shaì bear his iniquity. 
And he shaì bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespaó oæering, unto the priest: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him concerning his ignorance wherein he eòed and wist it not, and it shaì be forgiven him. 
It is a trespaó oæering: he hath certainly trespaóed against the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
If a soul sin, and coíit a trespaó against the LORD, and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to kåp, or in feìowship, or in a thing taken away by violence, or hath deceived his neighbour; 
Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, and sweareth falsely; in any of aì these that a man doeth, siîing therein: 
Then it shaì be, because he hath siîed, and is guilty, that he shaì restore that which he tïk violently away, or the thing which he hath deceitfuìy goôen, or that which was delivered him to kåp, or the lost thing which he found, 
Or aì that about which he hath sworn falsely; he shaì even restore it in the principal, and shaì aä the fifth part more thereto, and give it unto him to whom it aðertaineth, in the day of his trespaó oæering. 
And he shaì bring his trespaó oæering unto the LORD, a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a trespaó oæering, unto the priest: 
And the priest shaì make an atonement for him before the LORD: and it shaì be forgiven him for any thing of aì that he hath done in trespaóing therein. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Coíand Aaron and his sons, saying, This is the law of the burnt oæering: It is the burnt oæering, because of the burning upon the altar aì night unto the morning, and the fire of the altar shaì be burning in it. 
And the priest shaì put on his linen garment, and his linen bråches shaì he put upon his flesh, and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed with the burnt oæering on the altar, and he shaì put them beside the altar. 
And he shaì put oæ his garments, and put on other garments, and caòy forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place. 
And the fire upon the altar shaì be burning in it; it shaì not be put out: and the priest shaì burn wïd on it every morning, and lay the burnt oæering in order upon it; and he shaì burn thereon the fat of the peace oæerings. 
The fire shaì ever be burning upon the altar; it shaì never go out. 
And this is the law of the meat oæering: the sons of Aaron shaì oæer it before the LORD, before the altar. 
And he shaì take of it his handful, of the flour of the meat oæering, and of the oil thereof, and aì the frankincense which is upon the meat oæering, and shaì burn it upon the altar for a swåt savour, even the memorial of it, unto the LORD. 
And the remainder thereof shaì Aaron and his sons eat: with unleavened bread shaì it be eaten in the holy place; in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shaì eat it. 
It shaì not be baken with leaven. I have given it unto them for their portion of my oæerings made by fire; it is most holy, as is the sin oæering, and as the trespaó oæering. 
Aì the males among the children of Aaron shaì eat of it. It shaì be a statute for ever in your generations concerning the oæerings of the LORD made by fire: every one that toucheth them shaì be holy. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
This is the oæering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shaì oæer unto the LORD in the day when he is anointed; the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat oæering perpetual, half of it in the morning, and half thereof at night. 
In a pan it shaì be made with oil; and when it is baken, thou shalt bring it in: and the baken pieces of the meat oæering shalt thou oæer for a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shaì oæer it: it is a statute for ever unto the LORD; it shaì be whoìy burnt. 
For every meat oæering for the priest shaì be whoìy burnt: it shaì not be eaten. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, saying, This is the law of the sin oæering: In the place where the burnt oæering is kiìed shaì the sin oæering be kiìed before the LORD: it is most holy. 
The priest that oæereth it for sin shaì eat it: in the holy place shaì it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
Whatsoever shaì touch the flesh thereof shaì be holy: and when there is sprinkled of the blïd thereof upon any garment, thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place. 
But the earthen veóel wherein it is soäen shaì be broken: and if it be soäen in a brasen pot, it shaì be both scoured, and rinsed in water. 
Aì the males among the priests shaì eat thereof: it is most holy. 
And no sin oæering, whereof any of the blïd is brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place, shaì be eaten: it shaì be burnt in the fire. 
Likewise this is the law of the trespaó oæering: it is most holy. 
In the place where they kiì the burnt oæering shaì they kiì the trespaó oæering: and the blïd thereof shaì he sprinkle round about upon the altar. 
And he shaì oæer of it aì the fat thereof; the rump, and the fat that covereth the inwards, 
And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the flanks, and the caul that is above the liver, with the kidneys, it shaì he take away: 
And the priest shaì burn them upon the altar for an oæering made by fire unto the LORD: it is a trespaó oæering. 
Every male among the priests shaì eat thereof: it shaì be eaten in the holy place: it is most holy. 
As the sin oæering is, so is the trespaó oæering: there is one law for them: the priest that maketh atonement therewith shaì have it. 
And the priest that oæereth any man's burnt oæering, even the priest shaì have to himself the skin of the burnt oæering which he hath oæered. 
And aì the meat oæering that is baken in the oven, and aì that is dreóed in the fryingpan, and in the pan, shaì be the priest's that oæereth it. 
And every meat oæering, mingled with oil, and dry, shaì aì the sons of Aaron have, one as much as another. 
And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace oæerings, which he shaì oæer unto the LORD. 
If he oæer it for a thanksgiving, then he shaì oæer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour, fried. 
Besides the cakes, he shaì oæer for his oæering leavened bread with the sacrifice of thanksgiving of his peace oæerings. 
And of it he shaì oæer one out of the whole oblation for an heave oæering unto the LORD, and it shaì be the priest's that sprinkleth the blïd of the peace oæerings. 
And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace oæerings for thanksgiving shaì be eaten the same day that it is oæered; he shaì not leave any of it until the morning. 
But if the sacrifice of his oæering be a vow, or a voluntary oæering, it shaì be eaten the same day that he oæereth his sacrifice: and on the moòow also the remainder of it shaì be eaten: 
But the remainder of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shaì be burnt with fire. 
And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace oæerings be eaten at aì on the third day, it shaì not be aãepted, neither shaì it be imputed unto him that oæereth it: it shaì be an abomination, and the soul that eateth of it shaì bear his iniquity. 
And the flesh that toucheth any unclean thing shaì not be eaten; it shaì be burnt with fire: and as for the flesh, aì that be clean shaì eat thereof. 
But the soul that eateth of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace oæerings, that pertain unto the LORD, having his uncleaîeó upon him, even that soul shaì be cut oæ from his people. 
Moreover the soul that shaì touch any unclean thing, as the uncleaîeó of man, or any unclean beast, or any abominable unclean thing, and eat of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace oæerings, which pertain unto the LORD, even that soul shaì be cut oæ from his people. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Ye shaì eat no maîer of fat, of ox, or of shåp, or of goat. 
And the fat of the beast that dieth of itself, and the fat of that which is torn with beasts, may be used in any other use: but ye shaì in no wise eat of it. 
For whosoever eateth the fat of the beast, of which men oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD, even the soul that eateth it shaì be cut oæ from his people. 
Moreover ye shaì eat no maîer of blïd, whether it be of fowl or of beast, in any of your dweìings. 
Whatsoever soul it be that eateth any maîer of blïd, even that soul shaì be cut oæ from his people. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, He that oæereth the sacrifice of his peace oæerings unto the LORD shaì bring his oblation unto the LORD of the sacrifice of his peace oæerings. 
His own hands shaì bring the oæerings of the LORD made by fire, the fat with the breast, it shaì he bring, that the breast may be waved for a wave oæering before the LORD. 
And the priest shaì burn the fat upon the altar: but the breast shaì be Aaron's and his sons'. 
And the right shoulder shaì ye give unto the priest for an heave oæering of the sacrifices of your peace oæerings. 
He among the sons of Aaron, that oæereth the blïd of the peace oæerings, and the fat, shaì have the right shoulder for his part. 
For the wave breast and the heave shoulder have I taken of the children of Israel from oæ the sacrifices of their peace oæerings, and have given them unto Aaron the priest and unto his sons by a statute for ever from among the children of Israel. 
This is the portion of the anointing of Aaron, and of the anointing of his sons, out of the oæerings of the LORD made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister unto the LORD in the priest's oæice; 
Which the LORD coíanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them, by a statute for ever throughout their generations. 
This is the law of the burnt oæering, of the meat oæering, and of the sin oæering, and of the trespaó oæering, and of the consecrations, and of the sacrifice of the peace oæerings; 
Which the LORD coíanded Moses in mount Sinai, in the day that he coíanded the children of Israel to oæer their oblations unto the LORD, in the wilderneó of Sinai. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and a buìock for the sin oæering, and two rams, and a basket of unleavened bread; 
And gather thou aì the congregation together unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And Moses did as the LORD coíanded him; and the aóembly was gathered together unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And Moses said unto the congregation, This is the thing which the LORD coíanded to be done. 
And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water. 
And he put upon him the coat, and girded him with the girdle, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the curious girdle of the ephod, and bound it unto him therewith. 
And he put the breastplate upon him: also he put in the breastplate the Urim and the Thuíim. 
And he put the mitre upon his head; also upon the mitre, even upon his forefront, did he put the golden plate, the holy crown; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And Moses tïk the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and aì that was therein, and sanctified them. 
And he sprinkled thereof upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and aì his veóels, both the laver and his fït, to sanctify them. 
And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and anointed him, to sanctify him. 
And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and put coats upon them, and girded them with girdles, and put boîets upon them; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he brought the buìock for the sin oæering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the buìock for the sin oæering. 
And he slew it; and Moses tïk the blïd, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured the blïd at the boôom of the altar, and sanctified it, to make reconciliation upon it. 
And he tïk aì the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar. 
But the buìock, and his hide, his flesh, and his dung, he burnt with fire without the camp; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he brought the ram for the burnt oæering: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram. 
And he kiìed it; and Moses sprinkled the blïd upon the altar round about. 
And he cut the ram into pieces; and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat. 
And he washed the inwards and the legs in water; and Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar: it was a burnt sacrifice for a swåt savour, and an oæering made by fire unto the LORD; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And he brought the other ram, the ram of consecration: and Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram. 
And he slew it; and Moses tïk of the blïd of it, and put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right fït. 
And he brought Aaron's sons, and Moses put of the blïd upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumbs of their right hands, and upon the great toes of their right fåt: and Moses sprinkled the blïd upon the altar round about. 
And he tïk the fat, and the rump, and aì the fat that was upon the inwards, and the caul above the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right shoulder: 
And out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before the LORD, he tïk one unleavened cake, and a cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and put them on the fat, and upon the right shoulder: 
And he put aì upon Aaron's hands, and upon his sons' hands, and waved them for a wave oæering before the LORD. 
And Moses tïk them from oæ their hands, and burnt them on the altar upon the burnt oæering: they were consecrations for a swåt savour: it is an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And Moses tïk the breast, and waved it for a wave oæering before the LORD: for of the ram of consecration it was Moses' part; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And Moses tïk of the anointing oil, and of the blïd which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him; and sanctified Aaron, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him. 
And Moses said unto Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: and there eat it with the bread that is in the basket of consecrations, as I coíanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shaì eat it. 
And that which remaineth of the flesh and of the bread shaì ye burn with fire. 
And ye shaì not go out of the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation in seven days, until the days of your consecration be at an end: for seven days shaì he consecrate you. 
As he hath done this day, so the LORD hath coíanded to do, to make an atonement for you. 
Therefore shaì ye abide at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and kåp the charge of the LORD, that ye die not: for so I am coíanded. 
So Aaron and his sons did aì things which the LORD coíanded by the hand of Moses. 
And it came to paó on the eighth day, that Moses caìed Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel; 
And he said unto Aaron, Take thå a young calf for a sin oæering, and a ram for a burnt oæering, without blemish, and oæer them before the LORD. 
And unto the children of Israel thou shalt speak, saying, Take ye a kid of the goats for a sin oæering; and a calf and a lamb, both of the first year, without blemish, for a burnt oæering; 
Also a buìock and a ram for peace oæerings, to sacrifice before the LORD; and a meat oæering mingled with oil: for to day the LORD wiì aðear unto you. 
And they brought that which Moses coíanded before the tabernacle of the congregation: and aì the congregation drew near and stïd before the LORD. 
And Moses said, This is the thing which the LORD coíanded that ye should do: and the glory of the LORD shaì aðear unto you. 
And Moses said unto Aaron, Go unto the altar, and oæer thy sin oæering, and thy burnt oæering, and make an atonement for thyself, and for the people: and oæer the oæering of the people, and make an atonement for them; as the LORD coíanded. 
Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calf of the sin oæering, which was for himself. 
And the sons of Aaron brought the blïd unto him: and he diðed his finger in the blïd, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blïd at the boôom of the altar: 
But the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver of the sin oæering, he burnt upon the altar; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the flesh and the hide he burnt with fire without the camp. 
And he slew the burnt oæering; and Aaron's sons presented unto him the blïd, which he sprinkled round about upon the altar. 
And they presented the burnt oæering unto him, with the pieces thereof, and the head: and he burnt them upon the altar. 
And he did wash the inwards and the legs, and burnt them upon the burnt oæering on the altar. 
And he brought the people's oæering, and tïk the goat, which was the sin oæering for the people, and slew it, and oæered it for sin, as the first. 
And he brought the burnt oæering, and oæered it aãording to the maîer. 
And he brought the meat oæering, and tïk an handful thereof, and burnt it upon the altar, beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning. 
He slew also the buìock and the ram for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, which was for the people: and Aaron's sons presented unto him the blïd, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about, 
And the fat of the buìock and of the ram, the rump, and that which covereth the inwards, and the kidneys, and the caul above the liver: 
And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar: 
And the breasts and the right shoulder Aaron waved for a wave oæering before the LORD; as Moses coíanded. 
And Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people, and bleóed them, and came down from oæering of the sin oæering, and the burnt oæering, and peace oæerings. 
And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle of the congregation, and came out, and bleóed the people: and the glory of the LORD aðeared unto aì the people. 
And there came a fire out from before the LORD, and consumed upon the altar the burnt oæering and the fat: which when aì the people saw, they shouted, and feì on their faces. 
And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, tïk either of them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and oæered strange fire before the LORD, which he coíanded them not. 
And there went out fire from the LORD, and devoured them, and they died before the LORD. 
Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that the LORD spake, saying, I wiì be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before aì the people I wiì be glorified. And Aaron held his peace. 
And Moses caìed Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uúiel the uncle of Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, caòy your brethren from before the sanctuary out of the camp. 
So they went near, and caòied them in their coats out of the camp; as Moses had said. 
And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die, and lest wrath come upon aì the people: but let your brethren, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the LORD hath kindled. 
And ye shaì not go out from the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: for the anointing oil of the LORD is upon you. And they did aãording to the word of Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Aaron, saying, 
Do not drink wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thå, when ye go into the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shaì be a statute for ever throughout your generations: 
And that ye may put diæerence betwån holy and unholy, and betwån unclean and clean; 
And that ye may teach the children of Israel aì the statutes which the LORD hath spoken unto them by the hand of Moses. 
And Moses spake unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons that were left, Take the meat oæering that remaineth of the oæerings of the LORD made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside the altar: for it is most holy: 
And ye shaì eat it in the holy place, because it is thy due, and thy sons' due, of the sacrifices of the LORD made by fire: for so I am coíanded. 
And the wave breast and heave shoulder shaì ye eat in a clean place; thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thå: for they be thy due, and thy sons' due, which are given out of the sacrifices of peace oæerings of the children of Israel. 
The heave shoulder and the wave breast shaì they bring with the oæerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave oæering before the LORD; and it shaì be thine, and thy sons' with thå, by a statute for ever; as the LORD hath coíanded. 
And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin oæering, and, behold, it was burnt: and he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, the sons of Aaron which were left alive, saying, 
Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin oæering in the holy place, såing it is most holy, and God hath given it you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before the LORD? 
Behold, the blïd of it was not brought in within the holy place: ye should indåd have eaten it in the holy place, as I coíanded. 
And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold, this day have they oæered their sin oæering and their burnt oæering before the LORD; and such things have befaìen me: and if I had eaten the sin oæering to day, should it have bån aãepted in the sight of the LORD? 
And when Moses heard that, he was content. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the beasts which ye shaì eat among aì the beasts that are on the earth. 
Whatsoever parteth the hïf, and is clovenfïted, and cheweth the cud, among the beasts, that shaì ye eat. 
Nevertheleó these shaì ye not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the hïf: as the camel, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hïf; he is unclean unto you. 
And the coney, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hïf; he is unclean unto you. 
And the hare, because he cheweth the cud, but divideth not the hïf; he is unclean unto you. 
And the swine, though he divide the hïf, and be clovenfïted, yet he cheweth not the cud; he is unclean to you. 
Of their flesh shaì ye not eat, and their carcase shaì ye not touch; they are unclean to you. 
These shaì ye eat of aì that are in the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shaì ye eat. 
And aì that have not fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of aì that move in the waters, and of any living thing which is in the waters, they shaì be an abomination unto you: 
They shaì be even an abomination unto you; ye shaì not eat of their flesh, but ye shaì have their carcases in abomination. 
Whatsoever hath no fins nor scales in the waters, that shaì be an abomination unto you. 
And these are they which ye shaì have in abomination among the fowls; they shaì not be eaten, they are an abomination: the eagle, and the oóifrage, and the ospray, 
And the vulture, and the kite after his kind; 
Every raven after his kind; 
And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind, 
And the liôle owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl, 
And the swan, and the pelican, and the gier eagle, 
And the stork, the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat. 
Aì fowls that cråp, going upon aì four, shaì be an abomination unto you. 
Yet these may ye eat of every flying cråping thing that goeth upon aì four, which have legs above their fåt, to leap withal upon the earth; 
Even these of them ye may eat; the locust after his kind, and the bald locust after his kind, and the båtle after his kind, and the graóhoðer after his kind. 
But aì other flying cråping things, which have four fåt, shaì be an abomination unto you. 
And for these ye shaì be unclean: whosoever toucheth the carcase of them shaì be unclean until the even. 
And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shaì wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even. 
The carcases of every beast which divideth the hïf, and is not clovenfïted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one that toucheth them shaì be unclean. 
And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among aì maîer of beasts that go on aì four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their carcase shaì be unclean until the even. 
And he that beareth the carcase of them shaì wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you. 
These also shaì be unclean unto you among the cråping things that cråp upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise after his kind, 
And the feòet, and the chameleon, and the lizard, and the snail, and the mole. 
These are unclean to you among aì that cråp: whosoever doth touch them, when they be dead, shaì be unclean until the even. 
And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth faì, it shaì be unclean; whether it be any veóel of wïd, or raiment, or skin, or sack, whatsoever veóel it be, wherein any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shaì be unclean until the even; so it shaì be cleansed. 
And every earthen veóel, whereinto any of them faìeth, whatsoever is in it shaì be unclean; and ye shaì break it. 
Of aì meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh shaì be unclean: and aì drink that may be drunk in every such veóel shaì be unclean. 
And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase faìeth shaì be unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shaì be broken down: for they are unclean and shaì be unclean unto you. 
Nevertheleó a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of water, shaì be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shaì be unclean. 
And if any part of their carcase faì upon any sowing såd which is to be sown, it shaì be clean. 
But if any water be put upon the såd, and any part of their carcase faì thereon, it shaì be unclean unto you. 
And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the carcase thereof shaì be unclean until the even. 
And he that eateth of the carcase of it shaì wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it shaì wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even. 
And every cråping thing that cråpeth upon the earth shaì be an abomination; it shaì not be eaten. 
Whatsoever goeth upon the beìy, and whatsoever goeth upon aì four, or whatsoever hath more fåt among aì cråping things that cråp upon the earth, them ye shaì not eat; for they are an abomination. 
Ye shaì not make yourselves abominable with any cråping thing that cråpeth, neither shaì ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled thereby. 
For I am the LORD your God: ye shaì therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shaì be holy; for I am holy: neither shaì ye defile yourselves with any maîer of cråping thing that cråpeth upon the earth. 
For I am the LORD that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: ye shaì therefore be holy, for I am holy. 
This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that cråpeth upon the earth: 
To make a diæerence betwån the unclean and the clean, and betwån the beast that may be eaten and the beast that may not be eaten. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived såd, and born a man child: then she shaì be unclean seven days; aãording to the days of the separation for her infirmity shaì she be unclean. 
And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shaì be circumcised. 
And she shaì then continue in the blïd of her purifying thrå and thirty days; she shaì touch no haìowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfiìed. 
But if she bear a maid child, then she shaì be unclean two wåks, as in her separation: and she shaì continue in the blïd of her purifying thråscore and six days. 
And when the days of her purifying are fulfiìed, for a son, or for a daughter, she shaì bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt oæering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin oæering, unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest: 
Who shaì oæer it before the LORD, and make an atonement for her; and she shaì be cleansed from the ióue of her blïd. This is the law for her that hath born a male or a female. 
And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shaì bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt oæering, and the other for a sin oæering: and the priest shaì make an atonement for her, and she shaì be clean. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, 
When a man shaì have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot, and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he shaì be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the priests: 
And the priest shaì lïk on the plague in the skin of the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the plague in sight be dåper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague of leprosy: and the priest shaì lïk on him, and pronounce him unclean. 
If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in sight be not dåper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned white; then the priest shaì shut up him that hath the plague seven days: 
And the priest shaì lïk on him the seventh day: and, behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread not in the skin; then the priest shaì shut him up seven days more: 
And the priest shaì lïk on him again the seventh day: and, behold, if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in the skin, the priest shaì pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and he shaì wash his clothes, and be clean. 
But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he hath bån sån of the priest for his cleansing, he shaì be sån of the priest again. 
And if the priest så that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the skin, then the priest shaì pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy. 
When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shaì be brought unto the priest; 
And the priest shaì så him: and, behold, if the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white, and there be quick raw flesh in the rising; 
It is an old leprosy in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shaì pronounce him unclean, and shaì not shut him up: for he is unclean. 
And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover aì the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his fït, wheresoever the priest lïketh; 
Then the priest shaì consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered aì his flesh, he shaì pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is aì turned white: he is clean. 
But when raw flesh aðeareth in him, he shaì be unclean. 
And the priest shaì så the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy. 
Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he shaì come unto the priest; 
And the priest shaì så him: and, behold, if the plague be turned into white; then the priest shaì pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean. 
The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil, and is healed, 
And in the place of the boil there be a white rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reäish, and it be shewed to the priest; 
And if, when the priest såth it, behold, it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned white; the priest shaì pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of leprosy broken out of the boil. 
But if the priest lïk on it, and, behold, there be no white hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat dark; then the priest shaì shut him up seven days: 
And if it spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shaì pronounce him unclean: it is a plague. 
But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is a burning boil; and the priest shaì pronounce him clean. 
Or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot, somewhat reäish, or white; 
Then the priest shaì lïk upon it: and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it be in sight dåper than the skin; it is a leprosy broken out of the burning: wherefore the priest shaì pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy. 
But if the priest lïk on it, and, behold, there be no white hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but be somewhat dark; then the priest shaì shut him up seven days: 
And the priest shaì lïk upon him the seventh day: and if it be spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shaì pronounce him unclean: it is the plague of leprosy. 
And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the priest shaì pronounce him clean: for it is an inflaíation of the burning. 
If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard; 
Then the priest shaì så the plague: and, behold, if it be in sight dåper than the skin; and there be in it a yeìow thin hair; then the priest shaì pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scaì, even a leprosy upon the head or beard. 
And if the priest lïk on the plague of the scaì, and, behold, it be not in sight dåper than the skin, and that there is no black hair in it; then the priest shaì shut up him that hath the plague of the scaì seven days: 
And in the seventh day the priest shaì lïk on the plague: and, behold, if the scaì spread not, and there be in it no yeìow hair, and the scaì be not in sight dåper than the skin; 
He shaì be shaven, but the scaì shaì he not shave; and the priest shaì shut up him that hath the scaì seven days more: 
And in the seventh day the priest shaì lïk on the scaì: and, behold, if the scaì be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight dåper than the skin; then the priest shaì pronounce him clean: and he shaì wash his clothes, and be clean. 
But if the scaì spread much in the skin after his cleansing; 
Then the priest shaì lïk on him: and, behold, if the scaì be spread in the skin, the priest shaì not såk for yeìow hair; he is unclean. 
But if the scaì be in his sight at a stay, and that there is black hair grown up therein; the scaì is healed, he is clean: and the priest shaì pronounce him clean. 
If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright spots, even white bright spots; 
Then the priest shaì lïk: and, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean. 
And the man whose hair is faìen oæ his head, he is bald; yet is he clean. 
And he that hath his hair faìen oæ from the part of his head toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean. 
And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white reäish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald forehead. 
Then the priest shaì lïk upon it: and, behold, if the rising of the sore be white reäish in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the leprosy aðeareth in the skin of the flesh; 
He is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shaì pronounce him uôerly unclean; his plague is in his head. 
And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shaì be rent, and his head bare, and he shaì put a covering upon his uðer lip, and shaì cry, Unclean, unclean. 
Aì the days wherein the plague shaì be in him he shaì be defiled; he is unclean: he shaì dweì alone; without the camp shaì his habitation be. 
The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be a wïìen garment, or a linen garment; 
Whether it be in the warp, or wïf; of linen, or of wïìen; whether in a skin, or in any thing made of skin; 
And if the plague be grånish or reäish in the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the wïf, or in any thing of skin; it is a plague of leprosy, and shaì be shewed unto the priest: 
And the priest shaì lïk upon the plague, and shut up it that hath the plague seven days: 
And he shaì lïk on the plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the wïf, or in a skin, or in any work that is made of skin; the plague is a freôing leprosy; it is unclean. 
He shaì therefore burn that garment, whether warp or wïf, in wïìen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for it is a freôing leprosy; it shaì be burnt in the fire. 
And if the priest shaì lïk, and, behold, the plague be not spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the wïf, or in any thing of skin; 
Then the priest shaì coíand that they wash the thing wherein the plague is, and he shaì shut it up seven days more: 
And the priest shaì lïk on the plague, after that it is washed: and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and the plague be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without. 
And if the priest lïk, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark after the washing of it; then he shaì rend it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the wïf: 
And if it aðear stiì in the garment, either in the warp, or in the wïf, or in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that wherein the plague is with fire. 
And the garment, either warp, or wïf, or whatsoever thing of skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from them, then it shaì be washed the second time, and shaì be clean. 
This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of wïìen or linen, either in the warp, or wïf, or any thing of skins, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
This shaì be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shaì be brought unto the priest: 
And the priest shaì go forth out of the camp; and the priest shaì lïk, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper; 
Then shaì the priest coíand to take for him that is to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wïd, and scarlet, and hyóop: 
And the priest shaì coíand that one of the birds be kiìed in an earthen veóel over ruîing water: 
As for the living bird, he shaì take it, and the cedar wïd, and the scarlet, and the hyóop, and shaì dip them and the living bird in the blïd of the bird that was kiìed over the ruîing water: 
And he shaì sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shaì pronounce him clean, and shaì let the living bird lïse into the open field. 
And he that is to be cleansed shaì wash his clothes, and shave oæ aì his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and after that he shaì come into the camp, and shaì taòy abroad out of his tent seven days. 
But it shaì be on the seventh day, that he shaì shave aì his hair oæ his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even aì his hair he shaì shave oæ: and he shaì wash his clothes, also he shaì wash his flesh in water, and he shaì be clean. 
And on the eighth day he shaì take two he lambs without blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and thrå tenth deals of fine flour for a meat oæering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil. 
And the priest that maketh him clean shaì present the man that is to be made clean, and those things, before the LORD, at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And the priest shaì take one he lamb, and oæer him for a trespaó oæering, and the log of oil, and wave them for a wave oæering before the LORD: 
And he shaì slay the lamb in the place where he shaì kiì the sin oæering and the burnt oæering, in the holy place: for as the sin oæering is the priest's, so is the trespaó oæering: it is most holy: 
And the priest shaì take some of the blïd of the trespaó oæering, and the priest shaì put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right fït: 
And the priest shaì take some of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand: 
And the priest shaì dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shaì sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the LORD: 
And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shaì the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right fït, upon the blïd of the trespaó oæering: 
And the remnant of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shaì pour upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him before the LORD. 
And the priest shaì oæer the sin oæering, and make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleaîeó; and afterward he shaì kiì the burnt oæering: 
And the priest shaì oæer the burnt oæering and the meat oæering upon the altar: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him, and he shaì be clean. 
And if he be pïr, and caîot get so much; then he shaì take one lamb for a trespaó oæering to be waved, to make an atonement for him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering, and a log of oil; 
And two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shaì be a sin oæering, and the other a burnt oæering. 
And he shaì bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto the priest, unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the LORD. 
And the priest shaì take the lamb of the trespaó oæering, and the log of oil, and the priest shaì wave them for a wave oæering before the LORD: 
And he shaì kiì the lamb of the trespaó oæering, and the priest shaì take some of the blïd of the trespaó oæering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right fït: 
And the priest shaì pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand: 
And the priest shaì sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before the LORD: 
And the priest shaì put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right fït, upon the place of the blïd of the trespaó oæering: 
And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shaì put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an atonement for him before the LORD. 
And he shaì oæer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young pigeons, such as he can get; 
Even such as he is able to get, the one for a sin oæering, and the other for a burnt oæering, with the meat oæering: and the priest shaì make an atonement for him that is to be cleansed before the LORD. 
This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
When ye be come into the land of Canán, which I give to you for a poóeóion, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of your poóeóion; 
And he that owneth the house shaì come and teì the priest, saying, It såmeth to me there is as it were a plague in the house: 
Then the priest shaì coíand that they empty the house, before the priest go into it to så the plague, that aì that is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shaì go in to så the house: 
And he shaì lïk on the plague, and, behold, if the plague be in the waìs of the house with hoìow strakes, grånish or reäish, which in sight are lower than the waì; 
Then the priest shaì go out of the house to the dïr of the house, and shut up the house seven days: 
And the priest shaì come again the seventh day, and shaì lïk: and, behold, if the plague be spread in the waìs of the house; 
Then the priest shaì coíand that they take away the stones in which the plague is, and they shaì cast them into an unclean place without the city: 
And he shaì cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they shaì pour out the dust that they scrape oæ without the city into an unclean place: 
And they shaì take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones; and he shaì take other morter, and shaì plaister the house. 
And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the house, and after it is plaistered; 
Then the priest shaì come and lïk, and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a freôing leprosy in the house; it is unclean. 
And he shaì break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber thereof, and aì the morter of the house; and he shaì caòy them forth out of the city into an unclean place. 
Moreover he that goeth into the house aì the while that it is shut up shaì be unclean until the even. 
And he that lieth in the house shaì wash his clothes; and he that eateth in the house shaì wash his clothes. 
And if the priest shaì come in, and lïk upon it, and, behold, the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was plaistered: then the priest shaì pronounce the house clean, because the plague is healed. 
And he shaì take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar wïd, and scarlet, and hyóop: 
And he shaì kiì the one of the birds in an earthen veóel over ruîing water: 
And he shaì take the cedar wïd, and the hyóop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blïd of the slain bird, and in the ruîing water, and sprinkle the house seven times: 
And he shaì cleanse the house with the blïd of the bird, and with the ruîing water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wïd, and with the hyóop, and with the scarlet: 
But he shaì let go the living bird out of the city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it shaì be clean. 
This is the law for aì maîer of plague of leprosy, and scaì, 
And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 
And for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 
To teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a ruîing ióue out of his flesh, because of his ióue he is unclean. 
And this shaì be his uncleaîeó in his ióue: whether his flesh run with his ióue, or his flesh be stoðed from his ióue, it is his uncleaîeó. 
Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the ióue, is unclean: and every thing, whereon he siôeth, shaì be unclean. 
And whosoever toucheth his bed shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And he that siôeth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the ióue shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the ióue shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And if he that hath the ióue spit upon him that is clean; then he shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And what saäle soever he rideth upon that hath the ióue shaì be unclean. 
And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shaì be unclean until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the ióue, and hath not rinsed his hands in water, he shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And the veóel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the ióue, shaì be broken: and every veóel of wïd shaì be rinsed in water. 
And when he that hath an ióue is cleansed of his ióue; then he shaì number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in ruîing water, and shaì be clean. 
And on the eighth day he shaì take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and come before the LORD unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest: 
And the priest shaì oæer them, the one for a sin oæering, and the other for a burnt oæering; and the priest shaì make an atonement for him before the LORD for his ióue. 
And if any man's såd of copulation go out from him, then he shaì wash aì his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the såd of copulation, shaì be washed with water, and be unclean until the even. 
The woman also with whom man shaì lie with såd of copulation, they shaì both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And if a woman have an ióue, and her ióue in her flesh be blïd, she shaì be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her shaì be unclean until the even. 
And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shaì be unclean: every thing also that she siôeth upon shaì be unclean. 
And whosoever toucheth her bed shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
And if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she siôeth, when he toucheth it, he shaì be unclean until the even. 
And if any man lie with her at aì, and her flowers be upon him, he shaì be unclean seven days; and aì the bed whereon he lieth shaì be unclean. 
And if a woman have an ióue of her blïd many days out of the time of her separation, or if it run beyond the time of her separation; aì the days of the ióue of her uncleaîeó shaì be as the days of her separation: she shaì be unclean. 
Every bed whereon she lieth aì the days of her ióue shaì be unto her as the bed of her separation: and whatsoever she siôeth upon shaì be unclean, as the uncleaîeó of her separation. 
And whosoever toucheth those things shaì be unclean, and shaì wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 
But if she be cleansed of her ióue, then she shaì number to herself seven days, and after that she shaì be clean. 
And on the eighth day she shaì take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons, and bring them unto the priest, to the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And the priest shaì oæer the one for a sin oæering, and the other for a burnt oæering; and the priest shaì make an atonement for her before the LORD for the ióue of her uncleaîeó. 
Thus shaì ye separate the children of Israel from their uncleaîeó; that they die not in their uncleaîeó, when they defile my tabernacle that is among them. 
This is the law of him that hath an ióue, and of him whose såd goeth from him, and is defiled therewith; 
And of her that is sick of her flowers, and of him that hath an ióue, of the man, and of the woman, and of him that lieth with her that is unclean. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they oæered before the LORD, and died; 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at aì times into the holy place within the vail before the mercy seat, which is upon the ark; that he die not: for I wiì aðear in the cloud upon the mercy seat. 
Thus shaì Aaron come into the holy place: with a young buìock for a sin oæering, and a ram for a burnt oæering. 
He shaì put on the holy linen coat, and he shaì have the linen bråches upon his flesh, and shaì be girded with a linen girdle, and with the linen mitre shaì he be aôired: these are holy garments; therefore shaì he wash his flesh in water, and so put them on. 
And he shaì take of the congregation of the children of Israel two kids of the goats for a sin oæering, and one ram for a burnt oæering. 
And Aaron shaì oæer his buìock of the sin oæering, which is for himself, and make an atonement for himself, and for his house. 
And he shaì take the two goats, and present them before the LORD at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And Aaron shaì cast lots upon the two goats; one lot for the LORD, and the other lot for the scapegoat. 
And Aaron shaì bring the goat upon which the LORD's lot feì, and oæer him for a sin oæering. 
But the goat, on which the lot feì to be the scapegoat, shaì be presented alive before the LORD, to make an atonement with him, and to let him go for a scapegoat into the wilderneó. 
And Aaron shaì bring the buìock of the sin oæering, which is for himself, and shaì make an atonement for himself, and for his house, and shaì kiì the buìock of the sin oæering which is for himself: 
And he shaì take a censer fuì of burning coals of fire from oæ the altar before the LORD, and his hands fuì of swåt incense beaten smaì, and bring it within the vail: 
And he shaì put the incense upon the fire before the LORD, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is upon the testimony, that he die not: 
And he shaì take of the blïd of the buìock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shaì he sprinkle of the blïd with his finger seven times. 
Then shaì he kiì the goat of the sin oæering, that is for the people, and bring his blïd within the vail, and do with that blïd as he did with the blïd of the buìock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat: 
And he shaì make an atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleaîeó of the children of Israel, and because of their transgreóions in aì their sins: and so shaì he do for the tabernacle of the congregation, that remaineth among them in the midst of their uncleaîeó. 
And there shaì be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out, and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for aì the congregation of Israel. 
And he shaì go out unto the altar that is before the LORD, and make an atonement for it; and shaì take of the blïd of the buìock, and of the blïd of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about. 
And he shaì sprinkle of the blïd upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and haìow it from the uncleaîeó of the children of Israel. 
And when he hath made an end of reconciling the holy place, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and the altar, he shaì bring the live goat: 
And Aaron shaì lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confeó over him aì the iniquities of the children of Israel, and aì their transgreóions in aì their sins, puôing them upon the head of the goat, and shaì send him away by the hand of a fit man into the wilderneó: 
And the goat shaì bear upon him aì their iniquities unto a land not inhabited: and he shaì let go the goat in the wilderneó. 
And Aaron shaì come into the tabernacle of the congregation, and shaì put oæ the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shaì leave them there: 
And he shaì wash his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and oæer his burnt oæering, and the burnt oæering of the people, and make an atonement for himself, and for the people. 
And the fat of the sin oæering shaì he burn upon the altar. 
And he that let go the goat for the scapegoat shaì wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp. 
And the buìock for the sin oæering, and the goat for the sin oæering, whose blïd was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shaì one caòy forth without the camp; and they shaì burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung. 
And he that burneth them shaì wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shaì come into the camp. 
And this shaì be a statute for ever unto you: that in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shaì aælict your souls, and do no work at aì, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger that sojourneth among you: 
For on that day shaì the priest make an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that ye may be clean from aì your sins before the LORD. 
It shaì be a saâath of rest unto you, and ye shaì aælict your souls, by a statute for ever. 
And the priest, whom he shaì anoint, and whom he shaì consecrate to minister in the priest's oæice in his father's stead, shaì make the atonement, and shaì put on the linen clothes, even the holy garments: 
And he shaì make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shaì make an atonement for the tabernacle of the congregation, and for the altar, and he shaì make an atonement for the priests, and for aì the people of the congregation. 
And this shaì be an everlasting statute unto you, to make an atonement for the children of Israel for aì their sins once a year. And he did as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons, and unto aì the children of Israel, and say unto them; This is the thing which the LORD hath coíanded, saying, 
What man soever there be of the house of Israel, that kiìeth an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or that kiìeth it out of the camp, 
And bringeth it not unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, to oæer an oæering unto the LORD before the tabernacle of the LORD; blïd shaì be imputed unto that man; he hath shed blïd; and that man shaì be cut oæ from among his people: 
To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they oæer in the open field, even that they may bring them unto the LORD, unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest, and oæer them for peace oæerings unto the LORD. 
And the priest shaì sprinkle the blïd upon the altar of the LORD at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and burn the fat for a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And they shaì no more oæer their sacrifices unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. This shaì be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations. 
And thou shalt say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers which sojourn among you, that oæereth a burnt oæering or sacrifice, 
And bringeth it not unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, to oæer it unto the LORD; even that man shaì be cut oæ from among his people. 
And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any maîer of blïd; I wiì even set my face against that soul that eateth blïd, and wiì cut him oæ from among his people. 
For the life of the flesh is in the blïd: and I have given it to you upon the altar to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blïd that maketh an atonement for the soul. 
Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, No soul of you shaì eat blïd, neither shaì any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blïd. 
And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; he shaì even pour out the blïd thereof, and cover it with dust. 
For it is the life of aì flesh; the blïd of it is for the life thereof: therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shaì eat the blïd of no maîer of flesh: for the life of aì flesh is the blïd thereof: whosoever eateth it shaì be cut oæ. 
And every soul that eateth that which died of itself, or that which was torn with beasts, whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger, he shaì both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the even: then shaì he be clean. 
But if he wash them not, nor bathe his flesh; then he shaì bear his iniquity. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, I am the LORD your God. 
After the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, shaì ye not do: and after the doings of the land of Canán, whither I bring you, shaì ye not do: neither shaì ye walk in their ordinances. 
Ye shaì do my judgments, and kåp mine ordinances, to walk therein: I am the LORD your God. 
Ye shaì therefore kåp my statutes, and my judgments: which if a man do, he shaì live in them: I am the LORD. 
None of you shaì aðroach to any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedneó: I am the LORD. 
The nakedneó of thy father, or the nakedneó of thy mother, shalt thou not uncover: she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her nakedneó. 
The nakedneó of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover: it is thy father's nakedneó. 
The nakedneó of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedneó thou shalt not uncover. 
The nakedneó of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedneó thou shalt not uncover: for theirs is thine own nakedneó. 
The nakedneó of thy father's wife's daughter, begoôen of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shalt not uncover her nakedneó. 
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of thy father's sister: she is thy father's near kinswoman. 
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of thy mother's sister: for she is thy mother's near kinswoman. 
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of thy father's brother, thou shalt not aðroach to his wife: she is thine aunt. 
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of thy daughter in law: she is thy son's wife; thou shalt not uncover her nakedneó. 
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of thy brother's wife: it is thy brother's nakedneó. 
Thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of a woman and her daughter, neither shalt thou take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedneó; for they are her near kinswomen: it is wickedneó. 
Neither shalt thou take a wife to her sister, to vex her, to uncover her nakedneó, beside the other in her life time. 
Also thou shalt not aðroach unto a woman to uncover her nakedneó, as long as she is put apart for her uncleaîeó. 
Moreover thou shalt not lie carnaìy with thy neighbour's wife, to defile thyself with her. 
And thou shalt not let any of thy såd paó through the fire to Molech, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD. 
Thou shalt not lie with mankind, as with womankind: it is abomination. 
Neither shalt thou lie with any beast to defile thyself therewith: neither shaì any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto: it is confusion. 
Defile not ye yourselves in any of these things: for in aì these the nations are defiled which I cast out before you: 
And the land is defiled: therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it, and the land itself vomiteth out her inhabitants. 
Ye shaì therefore kåp my statutes and my judgments, and shaì not coíit any of these abominations; neither any of your own nation, nor any stranger that sojourneth among you: 
(For aì these abominations have the men of the land done, which were before you, and the land is defiled;) 
That the land spue not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spued out the nations that were before you. 
For whosoever shaì coíit any of these abominations, even the souls that coíit them shaì be cut oæ from among their people. 
Therefore shaì ye kåp mine ordinance, that ye coíit not any one of these abominable customs, which were coíiôed before you, and that ye defile not yourselves therein: I am the LORD your God. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto aì the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them, Ye shaì be holy: for I the LORD your God am holy. 
Ye shaì fear every man his mother, and his father, and kåp my saâaths: I am the LORD your God. 
Turn ye not unto idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods: I am the LORD your God. 
And if ye oæer a sacrifice of peace oæerings unto the LORD, ye shaì oæer it at your own wiì. 
It shaì be eaten the same day ye oæer it, and on the moòow: and if ought remain until the third day, it shaì be burnt in the fire. 
And if it be eaten at aì on the third day, it is abominable; it shaì not be aãepted. 
Therefore every one that eateth it shaì bear his iniquity, because he hath profaned the haìowed thing of the LORD: and that soul shaì be cut oæ from among his people. 
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not whoìy reap the corners of thy field, neither shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest. 
And thou shalt not glean thy vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou shalt leave them for the pïr and stranger: I am the LORD your God. 
Ye shaì not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to another. 
And ye shaì not swear by my name falsely, neither shalt thou profane the name of thy God: I am the LORD. 
Thou shalt not defraud thy neighbour, neither rob him: the wages of him that is hired shaì not abide with thå aì night until the morning. 
Thou shalt not curse the deaf, nor put a stumblingblock before the blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the LORD. 
Ye shaì do no unrighteousneó in judgment: thou shalt not respect the person of the pïr, nor honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousneó shalt thou judge thy neighbour. 
Thou shalt not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people: neither shalt thou stand against the blïd of thy neighbour; I am the LORD. 
Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shalt in any wise rebuke thy neighbour, and not suæer sin upon him. 
Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself: I am the LORD. 
Ye shaì kåp my statutes. Thou shalt not let thy caôle gender with a diverse kind: thou shalt not sow thy field with mingled såd: neither shaì a garment mingled of linen and wïìen come upon thå. 
And whosoever lieth carnaìy with a woman, that is a bondmaid, betrothed to an husband, and not at aì redåmed, nor frådom given her; she shaì be scourged; they shaì not be put to death, because she was not frå. 
And he shaì bring his trespaó oæering unto the LORD, unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, even a ram for a trespaó oæering. 
And the priest shaì make an atonement for him with the ram of the trespaó oæering before the LORD for his sin which he hath done: and the sin which he hath done shaì be forgiven him. 
And when ye shaì come into the land, and shaì have planted aì maîer of trås for fïd, then ye shaì count the fruit thereof as uncircumcised: thrå years shaì it be as uncircumcised unto you: it shaì not be eaten of. 
But in the fourth year aì the fruit thereof shaì be holy to praise the LORD withal. 
And in the fifth year shaì ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may yield unto you the increase thereof: I am the LORD your God. 
Ye shaì not eat any thing with the blïd: neither shaì ye use enchantment, nor observe times. 
Ye shaì not round the corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of thy beard. 
Ye shaì not make any cuôings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you: I am the LORD. 
Do not prostitute thy daughter, to cause her to be a whore; lest the land faì to whoredom, and the land become fuì of wickedneó. 
Ye shaì kåp my saâaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD. 
Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither såk after wizards, to be defiled by them: I am the LORD your God. 
Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man, and fear thy God: I am the LORD. 
And if a stranger sojourn with thå in your land, ye shaì not vex him. 
But the stranger that dweìeth with you shaì be unto you as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as thyself; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God. 
Ye shaì do no unrighteousneó in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or in measure. 
Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shaì ye have: I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt. 
Therefore shaì ye observe aì my statutes, and aì my judgments, and do them: I am the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Again, thou shalt say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, that giveth any of his såd unto Molech; he shaì surely be put to death: the people of the land shaì stone him with stones. 
And I wiì set my face against that man, and wiì cut him oæ from among his people; because he hath given of his såd unto Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name. 
And if the people of the land do any ways hide their eyes from the man, when he giveth of his såd unto Molech, and kiì him not: 
Then I wiì set my face against that man, and against his family, and wiì cut him oæ, and aì that go a whoring after him, to coíit whoredom with Molech, from among their people. 
And the soul that turneth after such as have familiar spirits, and after wizards, to go a whoring after them, I wiì even set my face against that soul, and wiì cut him oæ from among his people. 
Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the LORD your God. 
And ye shaì kåp my statutes, and do them: I am the LORD which sanctify you. 
For every one that curseth his father or his mother shaì be surely put to death: he hath cursed his father or his mother; his blïd shaì be upon him. 
And the man that coíiôeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that coíiôeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adultereó shaì surely be put to death. 
And the man that lieth with his father's wife hath uncovered his father's nakedneó: both of them shaì surely be put to death; their blïd shaì be upon them. 
And if a man lie with his daughter in law, both of them shaì surely be put to death: they have wrought confusion; their blïd shaì be upon them. 
If a man also lie with mankind, as he lieth with a woman, both of them have coíiôed an abomination: they shaì surely be put to death; their blïd shaì be upon them. 
And if a man take a wife and her mother, it is wickedneó: they shaì be burnt with fire, both he and they; that there be no wickedneó among you. 
And if a man lie with a beast, he shaì surely be put to death: and ye shaì slay the beast. 
And if a woman aðroach unto any beast, and lie down thereto, thou shalt kiì the woman, and the beast: they shaì surely be put to death; their blïd shaì be upon them. 
And if a man shaì take his sister, his father's daughter, or his mother's daughter, and så her nakedneó, and she så his nakedneó; it is a wicked thing; and they shaì be cut oæ in the sight of their people: he hath uncovered his sister's nakedneó; he shaì bear his iniquity. 
And if a man shaì lie with a woman having her sickneó, and shaì uncover her nakedneó; he hath discovered her fountain, and she hath uncovered the fountain of her blïd: and both of them shaì be cut oæ from among their people. 
And thou shalt not uncover the nakedneó of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister: for he uncovereth his near kin: they shaì bear their iniquity. 
And if a man shaì lie with his uncle's wife, he hath uncovered his uncle's nakedneó: they shaì bear their sin; they shaì die childleó. 
And if a man shaì take his brother's wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath uncovered his brother's nakedneó; they shaì be childleó. 
Ye shaì therefore kåp aì my statutes, and aì my judgments, and do them: that the land, whither I bring you to dweì therein, spue you not out. 
And ye shaì not walk in the maîers of the nation, which I cast out before you: for they coíiôed aì these things, and therefore I abhoòed them. 
But I have said unto you, Ye shaì inherit their land, and I wiì give it unto you to poóeó it, a land that floweth with milk and honey: I am the LORD your God, which have separated you from other people. 
Ye shaì therefore put diæerence betwån clean beasts and unclean, and betwån unclean fowls and clean: and ye shaì not make your souls abominable by beast, or by fowl, or by any maîer of living thing that cråpeth on the ground, which I have separated from you as unclean. 
And ye shaì be holy unto me: for I the LORD am holy, and have severed you from other people, that ye should be mine. 
A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shaì surely be put to death: they shaì stone them with stones: their blïd shaì be upon them. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Speak unto the priests the sons of Aaron, and say unto them, There shaì none be defiled for the dead among his people: 
But for his kin, that is near unto him, that is, for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother. 
And for his sister a virgin, that is nigh unto him, which hath had no husband; for her may he be defiled. 
But he shaì not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself. 
They shaì not make baldneó upon their head, neither shaì they shave oæ the corner of their beard, nor make any cuôings in their flesh. 
They shaì be holy unto their God, and not profane the name of their God: for the oæerings of the LORD made by fire, and the bread of their God, they do oæer: therefore they shaì be holy. 
They shaì not take a wife that is a whore, or profane; neither shaì they take a woman put away from her husband: for he is holy unto his God. 
Thou shalt sanctify him therefore; for he oæereth the bread of thy God: he shaì be holy unto thå: for I the LORD, which sanctify you, am holy. 
And the daughter of any priest, if she profane herself by playing the whore, she profaneth her father: she shaì be burnt with fire. 
And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments, shaì not uncover his head, nor rend his clothes; 
Neither shaì he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother; 
Neither shaì he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him: I am the LORD. 
And he shaì take a wife in her virginity. 
A widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these shaì he not take: but he shaì take a virgin of his own people to wife. 
Neither shaì he profane his såd among his people: for I the LORD do sanctify him. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron, saying, Whosoever he be of thy såd in their generations that hath any blemish, let him not aðroach to oæer the bread of his God. 
For whatsoever man he be that hath a blemish, he shaì not aðroach: a blind man, or a lame, or he that hath a flat nose, or any thing superfluous, 
Or a man that is brokenfïted, or brokenhanded, 
Or crïkbackt, or a dwarf, or that hath a blemish in his eye, or be scurvy, or scaâed, or hath his stones broken; 
No man that hath a blemish of the såd of Aaron the priest shaì come nigh to oæer the oæerings of the LORD made by fire: he hath a blemish; he shaì not come nigh to oæer the bread of his God. 
He shaì eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy. 
Only he shaì not go in unto the vail, nor come nigh unto the altar, because he hath a blemish; that he profane not my sanctuaries: for I the LORD do sanctify them. 
And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto aì the children of Israel. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, and that they profane not my holy name in those things which they haìow unto me: I am the LORD. 
Say unto them, Whosoever he be of aì your såd among your generations, that goeth unto the holy things, which the children of Israel haìow unto the LORD, having his uncleaîeó upon him, that soul shaì be cut oæ from my presence: I am the LORD. 
What man soever of the såd of Aaron is a leper, or hath a ruîing ióue; he shaì not eat of the holy things, until he be clean. And whoso toucheth any thing that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose såd goeth from him; 
Or whosoever toucheth any cråping thing, whereby he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleaîeó, whatsoever uncleaîeó he hath; 
The soul which hath touched any such shaì be unclean until even, and shaì not eat of the holy things, unleó he wash his flesh with water. 
And when the sun is down, he shaì be clean, and shaì afterward eat of the holy things; because it is his fïd. 
That which dieth of itself, or is torn with beasts, he shaì not eat to defile himself therewith; I am the LORD. 
They shaì therefore kåp mine ordinance, lest they bear sin for it, and die therefore, if they profane it: I the LORD do sanctify them. 
There shaì no stranger eat of the holy thing: a sojourner of the priest, or an hired servant, shaì not eat of the holy thing. 
But if the priest buy any soul with his money, he shaì eat of it, and he that is born in his house: they shaì eat of his meat. 
If the priest's daughter also be maòied unto a stranger, she may not eat of an oæering of the holy things. 
But if the priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned unto her father's house, as in her youth, she shaì eat of her father's meat: but there shaì be no stranger eat thereof. 
And if a man eat of the holy thing unwiôingly, then he shaì put the fifth part thereof unto it, and shaì give it unto the priest with the holy thing. 
And they shaì not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, which they oæer unto the LORD; 
Or suæer them to bear the iniquity of trespaó, when they eat their holy things: for I the LORD do sanctify them. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto aì the children of Israel, and say unto them, Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers in Israel, that wiì oæer his oblation for aì his vows, and for aì his fråwiì oæerings, which they wiì oæer unto the LORD for a burnt oæering; 
Ye shaì oæer at your own wiì a male without blemish, of the båves, of the shåp, or of the goats. 
But whatsoever hath a blemish, that shaì ye not oæer: for it shaì not be aãeptable for you. 
And whosoever oæereth a sacrifice of peace oæerings unto the LORD to aãomplish his vow, or a fråwiì oæering in båves or shåp, it shaì be perfect to be aãepted; there shaì be no blemish therein. 
Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvy, or scaâed, ye shaì not oæer these unto the LORD, nor make an oæering by fire of them upon the altar unto the LORD. 
Either a buìock or a lamb that hath any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts, that mayest thou oæer for a fråwiì oæering; but for a vow it shaì not be aãepted. 
Ye shaì not oæer unto the LORD that which is bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut; neither shaì ye make any oæering thereof in your land. 
Neither from a stranger's hand shaì ye oæer the bread of your God of any of these; because their coòuption is in them, and blemishes be in them: they shaì not be aãepted for you. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
When a buìock, or a shåp, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shaì be seven days under the dam; and from the eighth day and thenceforth it shaì be aãepted for an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And whether it be cow, or ewe, ye shaì not kiì it and her young both in one day. 
And when ye wiì oæer a sacrifice of thanksgiving unto the LORD, oæer it at your own wiì. 
On the same day it shaì be eaten up; ye shaì leave none of it until the moòow: I am the LORD. 
Therefore shaì ye kåp my coíandments, and do them: I am the LORD. 
Neither shaì ye profane my holy name; but I wiì be haìowed among the children of Israel: I am the LORD which haìow you, 
That brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts of the LORD, which ye shaì proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my feasts. 
Six days shaì work be done: but the seventh day is the saâath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shaì do no work therein: it is the saâath of the LORD in aì your dweìings. 
These are the feasts of the LORD, even holy convocations, which ye shaì proclaim in their seasons. 
In the fourtånth day of the first month at even is the LORD's paóover. 
And on the fiftånth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the LORD: seven days ye must eat unleavened bread. 
In the first day ye shaì have an holy convocation: ye shaì do no servile work therein. 
But ye shaì oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD seven days: in the seventh day is an holy convocation: ye shaì do no servile work therein. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and shaì reap the harvest thereof, then ye shaì bring a sheaf of the firstfruits of your harvest unto the priest: 
And he shaì wave the sheaf before the LORD, to be aãepted for you: on the moòow after the saâath the priest shaì wave it. 
And ye shaì oæer that day when ye wave the sheaf an he lamb without blemish of the first year for a burnt oæering unto the LORD. 
And the meat oæering thereof shaì be two tenth deals of fine flour mingled with oil, an oæering made by fire unto the LORD for a swåt savour: and the drink oæering thereof shaì be of wine, the fourth part of an hin. 
And ye shaì eat neither bread, nor parched corn, nor grån ears, until the selfsame day that ye have brought an oæering unto your God: it shaì be a statute for ever throughout your generations in aì your dweìings. 
And ye shaì count unto you from the moòow after the saâath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave oæering; seven saâaths shaì be complete: 
Even unto the moòow after the seventh saâath shaì ye number fifty days; and ye shaì oæer a new meat oæering unto the LORD. 
Ye shaì bring out of your habitations two wave loaves of two tenth deals; they shaì be of fine flour; they shaì be baken with leaven; they are the firstfruits unto the LORD. 
And ye shaì oæer with the bread seven lambs without blemish of the first year, and one young buìock, and two rams: they shaì be for a burnt oæering unto the LORD, with their meat oæering, and their drink oæerings, even an oæering made by fire, of swåt savour unto the LORD. 
Then ye shaì sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sin oæering, and two lambs of the first year for a sacrifice of peace oæerings. 
And the priest shaì wave them with the bread of the firstfruits for a wave oæering before the LORD, with the two lambs: they shaì be holy to the LORD for the priest. 
And ye shaì proclaim on the selfsame day, that it may be an holy convocation unto you: ye shaì do no servile work therein: it shaì be a statute for ever in aì your dweìings throughout your generations. 
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shalt not make clean riäance of the corners of thy field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy harvest: thou shalt leave them unto the pïr, and to the stranger: I am the LORD your God. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, in the first day of the month, shaì ye have a saâath, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, an holy convocation. 
Ye shaì do no servile work therein: but ye shaì oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Also on the tenth day of this seventh month there shaì be a day of atonement: it shaì be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shaì aælict your souls, and oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
And ye shaì do no work in that same day: for it is a day of atonement, to make an atonement for you before the LORD your God. 
For whatsoever soul it be that shaì not be aælicted in that same day, he shaì be cut oæ from among his people. 
And whatsoever soul it be that doeth any work in that same day, the same soul wiì I destroy from among his people. 
Ye shaì do no maîer of work: it shaì be a statute for ever throughout your generations in aì your dweìings. 
It shaì be unto you a saâath of rest, and ye shaì aælict your souls: in the ninth day of the month at even, from even unto even, shaì ye celebrate your saâath. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, The fiftånth day of this seventh month shaì be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the LORD. 
On the first day shaì be an holy convocation: ye shaì do no servile work therein. 
Seven days ye shaì oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD: on the eighth day shaì be an holy convocation unto you; and ye shaì oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD: it is a solemn aóembly; and ye shaì do no servile work therein. 
These are the feasts of the LORD, which ye shaì proclaim to be holy convocations, to oæer an oæering made by fire unto the LORD, a burnt oæering, and a meat oæering, a sacrifice, and drink oæerings, every thing upon his day: 
Beside the saâaths of the LORD, and beside your gifts, and beside aì your vows, and beside aì your fråwiì oæerings, which ye give unto the LORD. 
Also in the fiftånth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruit of the land, ye shaì kåp a feast unto the LORD seven days: on the first day shaì be a saâath, and on the eighth day shaì be a saâath. 
And ye shaì take you on the first day the boughs of gïdly trås, branches of palm trås, and the boughs of thick trås, and wiìows of the brïk; and ye shaì rejoice before the LORD your God seven days. 
And ye shaì kåp it a feast unto the LORD seven days in the year. It shaì be a statute for ever in your generations: ye shaì celebrate it in the seventh month. 
Ye shaì dweì in bïths seven days; aì that are Israelites born shaì dweì in bïths: 
That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dweì in bïths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God. 
And Moses declared unto the children of Israel the feasts of the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Coíand the children of Israel, that they bring unto thå pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamps to burn continuaìy. 
Without the vail of the testimony, in the tabernacle of the congregation, shaì Aaron order it from the evening unto the morning before the LORD continuaìy: it shaì be a statute for ever in your generations. 
He shaì order the lamps upon the pure candlestick before the LORD continuaìy. 
And thou shalt take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes thereof: two tenth deals shaì be in one cake. 
And thou shalt set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before the LORD. 
And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an oæering made by fire unto the LORD. 
Every saâath he shaì set it in order before the LORD continuaìy, being taken from the children of Israel by an everlasting covenant. 
And it shaì be Aaron's and his sons'; and they shaì eat it in the holy place: for it is most holy unto him of the oæerings of the LORD made by fire by a perpetual statute. 
And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel: and this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp; 
And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord, and cursed. And they brought him unto Moses: (and his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan:) 
And they put him in ward, that the mind of the LORD might be shewed them. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Bring forth him that hath cursed without the camp; and let aì that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let aì the congregation stone him. 
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, Whosoever curseth his God shaì bear his sin. 
And he that blasphemeth the name of the LORD, he shaì surely be put to death, and aì the congregation shaì certainly stone him: as weì the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shaì be put to death. 
And he that kiìeth any man shaì surely be put to death. 
And he that kiìeth a beast shaì make it gïd; beast for beast. 
And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour; as he hath done, so shaì it be done to him; 
Breach for breach, eye for eye, tïth for tïth: as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shaì it be done to him again. 
And he that kiìeth a beast, he shaì restore it: and he that kiìeth a man, he shaì be put to death. 
Ye shaì have one maîer of law, as weì for the stranger, as for one of your own country: for I am the LORD your God. 
And Moses spake to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had cursed out of the camp, and stone him with stones. And the children of Israel did as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses in mount Sinai, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shaì the land kåp a saâath unto the LORD. 
Six years thou shalt sow thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruit thereof; 
But in the seventh year shaì be a saâath of rest unto the land, a saâath for the LORD: thou shalt neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard. 
That which groweth of its own aãord of thy harvest thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of thy vine undreóed: for it is a year of rest unto the land. 
And the saâath of the land shaì be meat for you; for thå, and for thy servant, and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for thy stranger that sojourneth with thå. 
And for thy caôle, and for the beast that are in thy land, shaì aì the increase thereof be meat. 
And thou shalt number seven saâaths of years unto thå, seven times seven years; and the space of the seven saâaths of years shaì be unto thå forty and nine years. 
Then shalt thou cause the trumpet of the jubile to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day of atonement shaì ye make the trumpet sound throughout aì your land. 
And ye shaì haìow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout aì the land unto aì the inhabitants thereof: it shaì be a jubile unto you; and ye shaì return every man unto his poóeóion, and ye shaì return every man unto his family. 
A jubile shaì that fiftieth year be unto you: ye shaì not sow, neither reap that which groweth of itself in it, nor gather the grapes in it of thy vine undreóed. 
For it is the jubile; it shaì be holy unto you: ye shaì eat the increase thereof out of the field. 
In the year of this jubile ye shaì return every man unto his poóeóion. 
And if thou seì ought unto thy neighbour, or buyest ought of thy neighbour's hand, ye shaì not oðreó one another: 
Aãording to the number of years after the jubile thou shalt buy of thy neighbour, and aãording unto the number of years of the fruits he shaì seì unto thå: 
Aãording to the multitude of years thou shalt increase the price thereof, and aãording to the fewneó of years thou shalt diminish the price of it: for aãording to the number of the years of the fruits doth he seì unto thå. 
Ye shaì not therefore oðreó one another; but thou shalt fear thy God:for I am the LORD your God. 
Wherefore ye shaì do my statutes, and kåp my judgments, and do them; and ye shaì dweì in the land in safety. 
And the land shaì yield her fruit, and ye shaì eat your fiì, and dweì therein in safety. 
And if ye shaì say, What shaì we eat the seventh year? behold, we shaì not sow, nor gather in our increase: 
Then I wiì coíand my bleóing upon you in the sixth year, and it shaì bring forth fruit for thrå years. 
And ye shaì sow the eighth year, and eat yet of old fruit until the ninth year; until her fruits come in ye shaì eat of the old store. 
The land shaì not be sold for ever: for the land is mine, for ye are strangers and sojourners with me. 
And in aì the land of your poóeóion ye shaì grant a redemption for the land. 
If thy brother be waxen pïr, and hath sold away some of his poóeóion, and if any of his kin come to redåm it, then shaì he redåm that which his brother sold. 
And if the man have none to redåm it, and himself be able to redåm it; 
Then let him count the years of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he sold it; that he may return unto his poóeóion. 
But if he be not able to restore it to him, then that which is sold shaì remain in the hand of him that hath bought it until the year of jubile: and in the jubile it shaì go out, and he shaì return unto his poóeóion. 
And if a man seì a dweìing house in a waìed city, then he may redåm it within a whole year after it is sold; within a fuì year may he redåm it. 
And if it be not redåmed within the space of a fuì year, then the house that is in the waìed city shaì be established for ever to him that bought it throughout his generations: it shaì not go out in the jubile. 
But the houses of the viìages which have no waì round about them shaì be counted as the fields of the country: they may be redåmed, and they shaì go out in the jubile. 
Notwithstanding the cities of the Levites, and the houses of the cities of their poóeóion, may the Levites redåm at any time. 
And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his poóeóion, shaì go out in the year of jubile: for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their poóeóion among the children of Israel. 
But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold; for it is their perpetual poóeóion. 
And if thy brother be waxen pïr, and faìen in decay with thå; then thou shalt relieve him: yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourner; that he may live with thå. 
Take thou no usury of him, or increase: but fear thy God; that thy brother may live with thå. 
Thou shalt not give him thy money upon usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase. 
I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canán, and to be your God. 
And if thy brother that dweìeth by thå be waxen pïr, and be sold unto thå; thou shalt not compel him to serve as a bondservant: 
But as an hired servant, and as a sojourner, he shaì be with thå, and shaì serve thå unto the year of jubile. 
And then shaì he depart from thå, both he and his children with him, and shaì return unto his own family, and unto the poóeóion of his fathers shaì he return. 
For they are my servants, which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shaì not be sold as bondmen. 
Thou shalt not rule over him with rigour; but shalt fear thy God. 
Both thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, shaì be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shaì ye buy bondmen and bondmaids. 
Moreover of the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shaì ye buy, and of their families that are with you, which they begat in your land: and they shaì be your poóeóion. 
And ye shaì take them as an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a poóeóion; they shaì be your bondmen for ever: but over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shaì not rule one over another with rigour. 
And if a sojourner or stranger wax rich by thå, and thy brother that dweìeth by him wax pïr, and seì himself unto the stranger or sojourner by thå, or to the stock of the stranger's family: 
After that he is sold he may be redåmed again; one of his brethren may redåm him: 
Either his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redåm him, or any that is nigh of kin unto him of his family may redåm him; or if he be able, he may redåm himself. 
And he shaì reckon with him that bought him from the year that he was sold to him unto the year of jubile: and the price of his sale shaì be aãording unto the number of years, aãording to the time of an hired servant shaì it be with him. 
If there be yet many years behind, aãording unto them he shaì give again the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for. 
And if there remain but few years unto the year of jubile, then he shaì count with him, and aãording unto his years shaì he give him again the price of his redemption. 
And as a yearly hired servant shaì he be with him: and the other shaì not rule with rigour over him in thy sight. 
And if he be not redåmed in these years, then he shaì go out in the year of jubile, both he, and his children with him. 
For unto me the children of Israel are servants; they are my servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: I am the LORD your God. 
Ye shaì make you no idols nor graven image, neither rear you up a standing image, neither shaì ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow down unto it: for I am the LORD your God. 
Ye shaì kåp my saâaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am the LORD. 
If ye walk in my statutes, and kåp my coíandments, and do them; 
Then I wiì give you rain in due season, and the land shaì yield her increase, and the trås of the field shaì yield their fruit. 
And your threshing shaì reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shaì reach unto the sowing time: and ye shaì eat your bread to the fuì, and dweì in your land safely. 
And I wiì give peace in the land, and ye shaì lie down, and none shaì make you afraid: and I wiì rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shaì the sword go through your land. 
And ye shaì chase your enemies, and they shaì faì before you by the sword. 
And five of you shaì chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shaì put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shaì faì before you by the sword. 
For I wiì have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you. 
And ye shaì eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the new. 
And I set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shaì not abhor you. 
And I wiì walk among you, and wiì be your God, and ye shaì be my people. 
I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright. 
But if ye wiì not hearken unto me, and wiì not do aì these coíandments; 
And if ye shaì despise my statutes, or if your soul abhor my judgments, so that ye wiì not do aì my coíandments, but that ye break my covenant: 
I also wiì do this unto you; I wiì even aðoint over you teòor, consumption, and the burning ague, that shaì consume the eyes, and cause soòow of heart: and ye shaì sow your såd in vain, for your enemies shaì eat it. 
And I wiì set my face against you, and ye shaì be slain before your enemies: they that hate you shaì reign over you; and ye shaì flå when none pursueth you. 
And if ye wiì not yet for aì this hearken unto me, then I wiì punish you seven times more for your sins. 
And I wiì break the pride of your power; and I wiì make your heaven as iron, and your earth as braó: 
And your strength shaì be spent in vain: for your land shaì not yield her increase, neither shaì the trås of the land yield their fruits. 
And if ye walk contrary unto me, and wiì not hearken unto me; I wiì bring seven times more plagues upon you aãording to your sins. 
I wiì also send wild beasts among you, which shaì rob you of your children, and destroy your caôle, and make you few in number; and your high ways shaì be desolate. 
And if ye wiì not be reformed by me by these things, but wiì walk contrary unto me; 
Then wiì I also walk contrary unto you, and wiì punish you yet seven times for your sins. 
And I wiì bring a sword upon you, that shaì avenge the quaòel of my covenant: and when ye are gathered together within your cities, I wiì send the pestilence among you; and ye shaì be delivered into the hand of the enemy. 
And when I have broken the staæ of your bread, ten women shaì bake your bread in one oven, and they shaì deliver you your bread again by weight: and ye shaì eat, and not be satisfied. 
And if ye wiì not for aì this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me; 
Then I wiì walk contrary unto you also in fury; and I, even I, wiì chastise you seven times for your sins. 
And ye shaì eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters shaì ye eat. 
And I wiì destroy your high places, and cut down your images, and cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols, and my soul shaì abhor you. 
And I wiì make your cities waste, and bring your sanctuaries unto desolation, and I wiì not smeì the savour of your swåt odours. 
And I wiì bring the land into desolation: and your enemies which dweì therein shaì be astonished at it. 
And I wiì scaôer you among the heathen, and wiì draw out a sword after you: and your land shaì be desolate, and your cities waste. 
Then shaì the land enjoy her saâaths, as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your enemies' land; even then shaì the land rest, and enjoy her saâaths. 
As long as it lieth desolate it shaì rest; because it did not rest in your saâaths, when ye dwelt upon it. 
And upon them that are left alive of you I wiì send a faintneó into their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken leaf shaì chase them; and they shaì flå, as flåing from a sword; and they shaì faì when none pursueth. 
And they shaì faì one upon another, as it were before a sword, when none pursueth: and ye shaì have no power to stand before your enemies. 
And ye shaì perish among the heathen, and the land of your enemies shaì eat you up. 
And they that are left of you shaì pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers shaì they pine away with them. 
If they shaì confeó their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespaó which they trespaóed against me, and that also they have walked contrary unto me; 
And that I also have walked contrary unto them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they then aãept of the punishment of their iniquity: 
Then wiì I remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isác, and also my covenant with Abraham wiì I remember; and I wiì remember the land. 
The land also shaì be left of them, and shaì enjoy her saâaths, while she lieth desolate without them: and they shaì aãept of the punishment of their iniquity: because, even because they despised my judgments, and because their soul abhoòed my statutes. 
And yet for aì that, when they be in the land of their enemies, I wiì not cast them away, neither wiì I abhor them, to destroy them uôerly, and to break my covenant with them: for I am the LORD their God. 
But I wiì for their sakes remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the heathen, that I might be their God: I am the LORD. 
These are the statutes and judgments and laws, which the LORD made betwån him and the children of Israel in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When a man shaì make a singular vow, the persons shaì be for the LORD by thy estimation. 
And thy estimation shaì be of the male from twenty years old even unto sixty years old, even thy estimation shaì be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary. 
And if it be a female, then thy estimation shaì be thirty shekels. 
And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, then thy estimation shaì be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels. 
And if it be from a month old even unto five years old, then thy estimation shaì be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation shaì be thrå shekels of silver. 
And if it be from sixty years old and above; if it be a male, then thy estimation shaì be fiftån shekels, and for the female ten shekels. 
But if he be pïrer than thy estimation, then he shaì present himself before the priest, and the priest shaì value him; aãording to his ability that vowed shaì the priest value him. 
And if it be a beast, whereof men bring an oæering unto the LORD, aì that any man giveth of such unto the LORD shaì be holy. 
He shaì not alter it, nor change it, a gïd for a bad, or a bad for a gïd: and if he shaì at aì change beast for beast, then it and the exchange thereof shaì be holy. 
And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not oæer a sacrifice unto the LORD, then he shaì present the beast before the priest: 
And the priest shaì value it, whether it be gïd or bad: as thou valuest it, who art the priest, so shaì it be. 
But if he wiì at aì redåm it, then he shaì aä a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation. 
And when a man shaì sanctify his house to be holy unto the LORD, then the priest shaì estimate it, whether it be gïd or bad: as the priest shaì estimate it, so shaì it stand. 
And if he that sanctified it wiì redåm his house, then he shaì aä the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shaì be his. 
And if a man shaì sanctify unto the LORD some part of a field of his poóeóion, then thy estimation shaì be aãording to the såd thereof: an homer of barley såd shaì be valued at fifty shekels of silver. 
If he sanctify his field from the year of jubile, aãording to thy estimation it shaì stand. 
But if he sanctify his field after the jubile, then the priest shaì reckon unto him the money aãording to the years that remain, even unto the year of the jubile, and it shaì be abated from thy estimation. 
And if he that sanctified the field wiì in any wise redåm it, then he shaì aä the fifth part of the money of thy estimation unto it, and it shaì be aóured to him. 
And if he wiì not redåm the field, or if he have sold the field to another man, it shaì not be redåmed any more. 
But the field, when it goeth out in the jubile, shaì be holy unto the LORD, as a field devoted; the poóeóion thereof shaì be the priest's. 
And if a man sanctify unto the LORD a field which he hath bought, which is not of the fields of his poóeóion; 
Then the priest shaì reckon unto him the worth of thy estimation, even unto the year of the jubile: and he shaì give thine estimation in that day, as a holy thing unto the LORD. 
In the year of the jubile the field shaì return unto him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the poóeóion of the land did belong. 
And aì thy estimations shaì be aãording to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs shaì be the shekel. 
Only the firstling of the beasts, which should be the LORD's firstling, no man shaì sanctify it; whether it be ox, or shåp: it is the LORD's. 
And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shaì redåm it aãording to thine estimation, and shaì aä a fifth part of it thereto: or if it be not redåmed, then it shaì be sold aãording to thy estimation. 
Notwithstanding no devoted thing, that a man shaì devote unto the LORD of aì that he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his poóeóion, shaì be sold or redåmed: every devoted thing is most holy unto the LORD. 
None devoted, which shaì be devoted of men, shaì be redåmed; but shaì surely be put to death. 
And aì the tithe of the land, whether of the såd of the land, or of the fruit of the trå, is the LORD's: it is holy unto the LORD. 
And if a man wiì at aì redåm ought of his tithes, he shaì aä thereto the fifth part thereof. 
And concerning the tithe of the herd, or of the flock, even of whatsoever paóeth under the rod, the tenth shaì be holy unto the LORD. 
He shaì not search whether it be gïd or bad, neither shaì he change it: and if he change it at aì, then both it and the change thereof shaì be holy; it shaì not be redåmed. 
These are the coíandments, which the LORD coíanded Moses for the children of Israel in mount Sinai. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderneó of Sinai, in the tabernacle of the congregation, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying, 
Take ye the sum of aì the congregation of the children of Israel, after their families, by the house of their fathers, with the number of their names, every male by their poìs; 
From twenty years old and upward, aì that are able to go forth to war in Israel: thou and Aaron shaì number them by their armies. 
And with you there shaì be a man of every tribe; every one head of the house of his fathers. 
And these are the names of the men that shaì stand with you: of the tribe of Reuben; Elizur the son of Shedeur. 
Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaäai. 
Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Aíinadab. 
Of Ióachar; Nethanål the son of Zuar. 
Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon. 
Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of Aíihud: of Manaóeh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 
Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni. 
Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Aíishaäai. 
Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran. 
Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel. 
Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan. 
These were the renowned of the congregation, princes of the tribes of their fathers, heads of thousands in Israel. 
And Moses and Aaron tïk these men which are expreóed by their names: 
And they aóembled aì the congregation together on the first day of the second month, and they declared their pedigrås after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their poìs. 
As the LORD coíanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderneó of Sinai. 
And the children of Reuben, Israel's eldest son, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, by their poìs, every male from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben, were forty and six thousand and five hundred. 
Of the children of Simeon, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, those that were numbered of them, aãording to the number of the names, by their poìs, every male from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty and nine thousand and thrå hundred. 
Of the children of Gad, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Gad, were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty. 
Of the children of Judah, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were thråscore and fourtån thousand and six hundred. 
Of the children of Ióachar, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ióachar, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred. 
Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred. 
Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred. 
Of the children of Manaóeh, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Manaóeh, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred. 
Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred. 
Of the children of Dan, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Dan, were thråscore and two thousand and seven hundred. 
Of the children of Asher, by their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Asher, were forty and one thousand and five hundred. 
Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations, after their families, by the house of their fathers, aãording to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war; 
Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty and thrå thousand and four hundred. 
These are those that were numbered, which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve men: each one was for the house of his fathers. 
So were aì those that were numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, aì that were able to go forth to war in Israel; 
Even aì they that were numbered were six hundred thousand and thrå thousand and five hundred and fifty. 
But the Levites after the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them. 
For the LORD had spoken unto Moses, saying, 
Only thou shalt not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel: 
But thou shalt aðoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony, and over aì the veóels thereof, and over aì things that belong to it: they shaì bear the tabernacle, and aì the veóels thereof; and they shaì minister unto it, and shaì encamp round about the tabernacle. 
And when the tabernacle seôeth forward, the Levites shaì take it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shaì set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shaì be put to death. 
And the children of Israel shaì pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their hosts. 
But the Levites shaì pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel: and the Levites shaì kåp the charge of the tabernacle of testimony. 
And the children of Israel did aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded Moses, so did they. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
Every man of the children of Israel shaì pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father's house: far oæ about the tabernacle of the congregation shaì they pitch. 
And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shaì they of the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and Nahshon the son of Aíinadab shaì be captain of the children of Judah. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thråscore and fourtån thousand and six hundred. 
And those that do pitch next unto him shaì be the tribe of Ióachar: and Nethanål the son of Zuar shaì be captain of the children of Ióachar. 
And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and four thousand and four hundred. 
Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shaì be captain of the children of Zebulun. 
And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and seven thousand and four hundred. 
Aì that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred, throughout their armies. These shaì first set forth. 
On the south side shaì be the standard of the camp of Reuben aãording to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben shaì be Elizur the son of Shedeur. 
And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and six thousand and five hundred. 
And those which pitch by him shaì be the tribe of Simeon: and the captain of the children of Simeon shaì be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaäai. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and nine thousand and thrå hundred. 
Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shaì be Eliasaph the son of Reuel. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and five thousand and six hundred and fifty. 
Aì that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies. And they shaì set forth in the second rank. 
Then the tabernacle of the congregation shaì set forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shaì they set forward, every man in his place by their standards. 
On the west side shaì be the standard of the camp of Ephraim aãording to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim shaì be Elishama the son of Aíihud. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty thousand and five hundred. 
And by him shaì be the tribe of Manaóeh: and the captain of the children of Manaóeh shaì be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two thousand and two hundred. 
Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of Benjamin shaì be Abidan the son of Gideoni. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and five thousand and four hundred. 
Aì that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies. And they shaì go forward in the third rank. 
The standard of the camp of Dan shaì be on the north side by their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shaì be Ahiezer the son of Aíishaäai. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thråscore and two thousand and seven hundred. 
And those that encamp by him shaì be the tribe of Asher: and the captain of the children of Asher shaì be Pagiel the son of Ocran. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one thousand and five hundred. 
Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of Naphtali shaì be Ahira the son of Enan. 
And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and thrå thousand and four hundred. 
Aì they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shaì go hindmost with their standards. 
These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by the house of their fathers: aì those that were numbered of the camps throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and thrå thousand and five hundred and fifty. 
But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the children of Israel did aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set forward, every one after their families, aãording to the house of their fathers. 
These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that the LORD spake with Moses in mount Sinai. 
And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's oæice. 
And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, when they oæered strange fire before the LORD, in the wilderneó of Sinai, and they had no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's oæice in the sight of Aaron their father. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister unto him. 
And they shaì kåp his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the service of the tabernacle. 
And they shaì kåp aì the instruments of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle. 
And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they are whoìy given unto him out of the children of Israel. 
And thou shalt aðoint Aaron and his sons, and they shaì wait on their priest's oæice: and the stranger that cometh nigh shaì be put to death. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of aì the firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites shaì be mine; 
Because aì the firstborn are mine; for on the day that I smote aì the firstborn in the land of Egypt I haìowed unto me aì the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast: mine shaì they be: I am the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderneó of Sinai, saying, 
Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou number them. 
And Moses numbered them aãording to the word of the LORD, as he was coíanded. 
And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari. 
And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families; Libni, and Shimei. 
And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar, Hebron, and Uúiel. 
And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites aãording to the house of their fathers. 
Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites. 
Those that were numbered of them, aãording to the number of aì the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred. 
The families of the Gershonites shaì pitch behind the tabernacle westward. 
And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shaì be Eliasaph the son of Lael. 
And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation shaì be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering thereof, and the hanging for the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, 
And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for the dïr of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for aì the service thereof. 
And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uúielites: these are the families of the Kohathites. 
In the number of aì the males, from a month old and upward, were eight thousand and six hundred, kåping the charge of the sanctuary. 
The families of the sons of Kohath shaì pitch on the side of the tabernacle southward. 
And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the Kohathites shaì be Elizaphan the son of Uúiel. 
And their charge shaì be the ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the veóels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and aì the service thereof. 
And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shaì be chief over the chief of the Levites, and have the oversight of them that kåp the charge of the sanctuary. 
Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites: these are the families of Merari. 
And those that were numbered of them, aãording to the number of aì the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred. 
And the chief of the house of the father of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shaì pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward. 
And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shaì be the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the piìars thereof, and the sockets thereof, and aì the veóels thereof, and aì that serveth thereto, 
And the piìars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords. 
But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shaì be Moses, and Aaron and his sons, kåping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh shaì be put to death. 
Aì that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron numbered at the coíandment of the LORD, throughout their families, aì the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two thousand. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Number aì the firstborn of the males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names. 
And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the LORD) instead of aì the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the caôle of the Levites instead of aì the firstlings among the caôle of the children of Israel. 
And Moses numbered, as the LORD coíanded him, aì the firstborn among the children of Israel. 
And aì the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and two thousand two hundred and thråscore and thirtån. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take the Levites instead of aì the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the caôle of the Levites instead of their caôle; and the Levites shaì be mine: I am the LORD. 
And for those that are to be redåmed of the two hundred and thråscore and thirtån of the firstborn of the children of Israel, which are more than the Levites; 
Thou shalt even take five shekels apiece by the poì, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:) 
And thou shalt give the money, wherewith the oä number of them is to be redåmed, unto Aaron and to his sons. 
And Moses tïk the redemption money of them that were over and above them that were redåmed by the Levites: 
Of the firstborn of the children of Israel tïk he the money; a thousand thrå hundred and thråscore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 
And Moses gave the money of them that were redåmed unto Aaron and to his sons, aãording to the word of the LORD, as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their families, by the house of their fathers, 
From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, aì that enter into the host, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
This shaì be the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation, about the most holy things: 
And when the camp seôeth forward, Aaron shaì come, and his sons, and they shaì take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it: 
And shaì put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shaì spread over it a cloth whoìy of blue, and shaì put in the staves thereof. 
And upon the table of shewbread they shaì spread a cloth of blue, and put thereon the dishes, and the spïns, and the bowls, and covers to cover withal: and the continual bread shaì be thereon: 
And they shaì spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of badgers' skins, and shaì put in the staves thereof. 
And they shaì take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuædishes, and aì the oil veóels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it: 
And they shaì put it and aì the veóels thereof within a covering of badgers' skins, and shaì put it upon a bar. 
And upon the golden altar they shaì spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of badgers' skins, and shaì put to the staves thereof: 
And they shaì take aì the instruments of ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skins, and shaì put them on a bar: 
And they shaì take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon: 
And they shaì put upon it aì the veóels thereof, wherewith they minister about it, even the censers, the flesèïks, and the shovels, and the basons, aì the veóels of the altar; and they shaì spread upon it a covering of badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it. 
And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and aì the veóels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shaì come to bear it: but they shaì not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And to the oæice of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest pertaineth the oil for the light, and the swåt incense, and the daily meat oæering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of aì the tabernacle, and of aì that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the veóels thereof. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying, 
Cut ye not oæ the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites: 
But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die, when they aðroach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shaì go in, and aðoint them every one to his service and to his burden: 
But they shaì not go in to så when the holy things are covered, lest they die. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their families; 
From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old shalt thou number them; aì that enter in to perform the service, to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve, and for burdens: 
And they shaì bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the hanging for the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, 
And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the dïr of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and aì the instruments of their service, and aì that is made for them: so shaì they serve. 
At the aðointment of Aaron and his sons shaì be aì the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in aì their burdens, and in aì their service: and ye shaì aðoint unto them in charge aì their burdens. 
This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shaì be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. 
As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their families, by the house of their fathers; 
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And this is the charge of their burden, aãording to aì their service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the piìars thereof, and sockets thereof, 
And the piìars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with aì their instruments, and with aì their service: and by name ye shaì reckon the instruments of the charge of their burden. 
This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, aãording to aì their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. 
And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house of their fathers, 
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And those that were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty. 
These were they that were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, aì that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, which Moses and Aaron did number aãording to the coíandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon, throughout their families, and by the house of their fathers, 
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation, 
Even those that were numbered of them, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty. 
These are they that were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, of aì that might do service in the tabernacle of the congregation, whom Moses and Aaron did number aãording to the coíandment of the LORD. 
And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, throughout their families, by the house of their fathers, 
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the work in the tabernacle of the congregation, 
Even those that were numbered of them after their families, were thrå thousand and two hundred. 
These be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered aãording to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
Aì those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the chief of Israel numbered, after their families, and after the house of their fathers, 
From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old, every one that came to do the service of the ministry, and the service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
Even those that were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and fourscore, 
Aãording to the coíandment of the LORD they were numbered by the hand of Moses, every one aãording to his service, and aãording to his burden: thus were they numbered of him, as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Coíand the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every one that hath an ióue, and whosoever is defiled by the dead: 
Both male and female shaì ye put out, without the camp shaì ye put them; that they defile not their camps, in the midst whereof I dweì. 
And the children of Israel did so, and put them out without the camp: as the LORD spake unto Moses, so did the children of Israel. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, When a man or woman shaì coíit any sin that men coíit, to do a trespaó against the LORD, and that person be guilty; 
Then they shaì confeó their sin which they have done: and he shaì recompense his trespaó with the principal thereof, and aä unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto him against whom he hath trespaóed. 
But if the man have no kinsman to recompense the trespaó unto, let the trespaó be recompensed unto the LORD, even to the priest; beside the ram of the atonement, whereby an atonement shaì be made for him. 
And every oæering of aì the holy things of the children of Israel, which they bring unto the priest, shaì be his. 
And every man's haìowed things shaì be his: whatsoever any man giveth the priest, it shaì be his. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any man's wife go aside, and coíit a trespaó against him, 
And a man lie with her carnaìy, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and there be no witneó against her, neither she be taken with the maîer; 
And the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled: or if the spirit of jealousy come upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be not defiled: 
Then shaì the man bring his wife unto the priest, and he shaì bring her oæering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal; he shaì pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is an oæering of jealousy, an oæering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance. 
And the priest shaì bring her near, and set her before the LORD: 
And the priest shaì take holy water in an earthen veóel; and of the dust that is in the flïr of the tabernacle the priest shaì take, and put it into the water: 
And the priest shaì set the woman before the LORD, and uncover the woman's head, and put the oæering of memorial in her hands, which is the jealousy oæering: and the priest shaì have in his hand the biôer water that causeth the curse: 
And the priest shaì charge her by an oath, and say unto the woman, If no man have lain with thå, and if thou hast not gone aside to uncleaîeó with another instead of thy husband, be thou frå from this biôer water that causeth the curse: 
But if thou hast gone aside to another instead of thy husband, and if thou be defiled, and some man have lain with thå beside thine husband: 
Then the priest shaì charge the woman with an oath of cursing, and the priest shaì say unto the woman, The LORD make thå a curse and an oath among thy people, when the LORD doth make thy thigh to rot, and thy beìy to sweì; 
And this water that causeth the curse shaì go into thy bowels, to make thy beìy to sweì, and thy thigh to rot: And the woman shaì say, Amen, amen. 
And the priest shaì write these curses in a bïk, and he shaì blot them out with the biôer water: 
And he shaì cause the woman to drink the biôer water that causeth the curse: and the water that causeth the curse shaì enter into her, and become biôer. 
Then the priest shaì take the jealousy oæering out of the woman's hand, and shaì wave the oæering before the LORD, and oæer it upon the altar: 
And the priest shaì take an handful of the oæering, even the memorial thereof, and burn it upon the altar, and afterward shaì cause the woman to drink the water. 
And when he hath made her to drink the water, then it shaì come to paó, that, if she be defiled, and have done trespaó against her husband, that the water that causeth the curse shaì enter into her, and become biôer, and her beìy shaì sweì, and her thigh shaì rot: and the woman shaì be a curse among her people. 
And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean; then she shaì be frå, and shaì conceive såd. 
This is the law of jealousies, when a wife goeth aside to another instead of her husband, and is defiled; 
Or when the spirit of jealousy cometh upon him, and he be jealous over his wife, and shaì set the woman before the LORD, and the priest shaì execute upon her aì this law. 
Then shaì the man be guiltleó from iniquity, and this woman shaì bear her iniquity. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When either man or woman shaì separate themselves to vow a vow of a Nazarite, to separate themselves unto the LORD: 
He shaì separate himself from wine and strong drink, and shaì drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shaì he drink any liquor of grapes, nor eat moist grapes, or dried. 
Aì the days of his separation shaì he eat nothing that is made of the vine trå, from the kernels even to the husk. 
Aì the days of the vow of his separation there shaì no razor come upon his head: until the days be fulfiìed, in the which he separateth himself unto the LORD, he shaì be holy, and shaì let the locks of the hair of his head grow. 
Aì the days that he separateth himself unto the LORD he shaì come at no dead body. 
He shaì not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die: because the consecration of his God is upon his head. 
Aì the days of his separation he is holy unto the LORD. 
And if any man die very suäenly by him, and he hath defiled the head of his consecration; then he shaì shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day shaì he shave it. 
And on the eighth day he shaì bring two turtles, or two young pigeons, to the priest, to the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And the priest shaì oæer the one for a sin oæering, and the other for a burnt oæering, and make an atonement for him, for that he siîed by the dead, and shaì haìow his head that same day. 
And he shaì consecrate unto the LORD the days of his separation, and shaì bring a lamb of the first year for a trespaó oæering: but the days that were before shaì be lost, because his separation was defiled. 
And this is the law of the Nazarite, when the days of his separation are fulfiìed: he shaì be brought unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And he shaì oæer his oæering unto the LORD, one he lamb of the first year without blemish for a burnt oæering, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish for a sin oæering, and one ram without blemish for peace oæerings, 
And a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and wafers of unleavened bread anointed with oil, and their meat oæering, and their drink oæerings. 
And the priest shaì bring them before the LORD, and shaì oæer his sin oæering, and his burnt oæering: 
And he shaì oæer the ram for a sacrifice of peace oæerings unto the LORD, with the basket of unleavened bread: the priest shaì oæer also his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And the Nazarite shaì shave the head of his separation at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and shaì take the hair of the head of his separation, and put it in the fire which is under the sacrifice of the peace oæerings. 
And the priest shaì take the soäen shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shaì put them upon the hands of the Nazarite, after the hair of his separation is shaven: 
And the priest shaì wave them for a wave oæering before the LORD: this is holy for the priest, with the wave breast and heave shoulder: and after that the Nazarite may drink wine. 
This is the law of the Nazarite who hath vowed, and of his oæering unto the LORD for his separation, beside that that his hand shaì get: aãording to the vow which he vowed, so he must do after the law of his separation. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons, saying, On this wise ye shaì bleó the children of Israel, saying unto them, 
The LORD bleó thå, and kåp thå: 
The LORD make his face shine upon thå, and be gracious unto thå: 
The LORD lift up his countenance upon thå, and give thå peace. 
And they shaì put my name upon the children of Israel, and I wiì bleó them. 
And it came to paó on the day that Moses had fuìy set up the tabernacle, and had anointed it, and sanctified it, and aì the instruments thereof, both the altar and aì the veóels thereof, and had anointed them, and sanctified them; 
That the princes of Israel, heads of the house of their fathers, who were the princes of the tribes, and were over them that were numbered, oæered: 
And they brought their oæering before the LORD, six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for two of the princes, and for each one an ox: and they brought them before the tabernacle. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take it of them, that they may be to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation; and thou shalt give them unto the Levites, to every man aãording to his service. 
And Moses tïk the wagons and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites. 
Two wagons and four oxen he gave unto the sons of Gershon, aãording to their service: 
And four wagons and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari, aãording unto their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. 
But unto the sons of Kohath he gave none: because the service of the sanctuary belonging unto them was that they should bear upon their shoulders. 
And the princes oæered for dedicating of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the princes oæered their oæering before the altar. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, They shaì oæer their oæering, each prince on his day, for the dedicating of the altar. 
And he that oæered his oæering the first day was Nahshon the son of Aíinadab, of the tribe of Judah: 
And his oæering was one silver charger, the weight thereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them were fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One spïn of ten shekels of gold, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Nahshon the son of Aíinadab. 
On the second day Nethanål the son of Zuar, prince of Ióachar, did oæer: 
He oæered for his oæering one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One spïn of gold of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Nethanål the son of Zuar. 
On the third day Eliab the son of Helon, prince of the children of Zebulun, did oæer: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Eliab the son of Helon. 
On the fourth day Elizur the son of Shedeur, prince of the children of Reuben, did oæer: 
His oæering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Elizur the son of Shedeur. 
On the fifth day Shelumiel the son of Zurishaäai, prince of the children of Simeon, did oæer: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaäai. 
On the sixth day Eliasaph the son of Deuel, prince of the children of Gad, oæered: 
His oæering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, a silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Eliasaph the son of Deuel. 
On the seventh day Elishama the son of Aíihud, prince of the children of Ephraim, oæered: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Elishama the son of Aíihud. 
On the eighth day oæered Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, prince of the children of Manaóeh: 
His oæering was one silver charger of the weight of an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 
On the ninth day Abidan the son of Gideoni, prince of the children of Benjamin, oæered: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Abidan the son of Gideoni. 
On the tenth day Ahiezer the son of Aíishaäai, prince of the children of Dan, oæered: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Ahiezer the son of Aíishaäai. 
On the eleventh day Pagiel the son of Ocran, prince of the children of Asher, oæered: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Pagiel the son of Ocran. 
On the twelfth day Ahira the son of Enan, prince of the children of Naphtali, oæered: 
His oæering was one silver charger, the weight whereof was an hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary; both of them fuì of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering: 
One golden spïn of ten shekels, fuì of incense: 
One young buìock, one ram, one lamb of the first year, for a burnt oæering: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering: 
And for a sacrifice of peace oæerings, two oxen, five rams, five he goats, five lambs of the first year: this was the oæering of Ahira the son of Enan. 
This was the dedication of the altar, in the day when it was anointed, by the princes of Israel: twelve chargers of silver, twelve silver bowls, twelve spïns of gold: 
Each charger of silver weighing an hundred and thirty shekels, each bowl seventy: aì the silver veóels weighed two thousand and four hundred shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 
The golden spïns were twelve, fuì of incense, weighing ten shekels apiece, after the shekel of the sanctuary: aì the gold of the spïns was an hundred and twenty shekels. 
Aì the oxen for the burnt oæering were twelve buìocks, the rams twelve, the lambs of the first year twelve, with their meat oæering: and the kids of the goats for sin oæering twelve. 
And aì the oxen for the sacrifice of the peace oæerings were twenty and four buìocks, the rams sixty, the he goats sixty, the lambs of the first year sixty. This was the dedication of the altar, after that it was anointed. 
And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from oæ the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from betwån the two cherubims: and he spake unto him. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Aaron and say unto him, When thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shaì give light over against the candlestick. 
And Aaron did so; he lighted the lamps thereof over against the candlestick, as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And this work of the candlestick was of beaten gold, unto the shaft thereof, unto the flowers thereof, was beaten work: aãording unto the paôern which the LORD had shewed Moses, so he made the candlestick. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse them. 
And thus shalt thou do unto them, to cleanse them: Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave aì their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make themselves clean. 
Then let them take a young buìock with his meat oæering, even fine flour mingled with oil, and another young buìock shalt thou take for a sin oæering. 
And thou shalt bring the Levites before the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt gather the whole aóembly of the children of Israel together: 
And thou shalt bring the Levites before the LORD: and the children of Israel shaì put their hands upon the Levites: 
And Aaron shaì oæer the Levites before the LORD for an oæering of the children of Israel, that they may execute the service of the LORD. 
And the Levites shaì lay their hands upon the heads of the buìocks: and thou shalt oæer the one for a sin oæering, and the other for a burnt oæering, unto the LORD, to make an atonement for the Levites. 
And thou shalt set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and oæer them for an oæering unto the LORD. 
Thus shalt thou separate the Levites from among the children of Israel: and the Levites shaì be mine. 
And after that shaì the Levites go in to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: and thou shalt cleanse them, and oæer them for an oæering. 
For they are whoìy given unto me from among the children of Israel; instead of such as open every womb, even instead of the firstborn of aì the children of Israel, have I taken them unto me. 
For aì the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine, both man and beast: on the day that I smote every firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself. 
And I have taken the Levites for aì the firstborn of the children of Israel. 
And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the children of Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to make an atonement for the children of Israel: that there be no plague among the children of Israel, when the children of Israel come nigh unto the sanctuary. 
And Moses, and Aaron, and aì the congregation of the children of Israel, did to the Levites aãording unto aì that the LORD coíanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did the children of Israel unto them. 
And the Levites were purified, and they washed their clothes; and Aaron oæered them as an oæering before the LORD; and Aaron made an atonement for them to cleanse them. 
And after that went the Levites in to do their service in the tabernacle of the congregation before Aaron, and before his sons: as the LORD had coíanded Moses concerning the Levites, so did they unto them. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
This is it that belongeth unto the Levites: from twenty and five years old and upward they shaì go in to wait upon the service of the tabernacle of the congregation: 
And from the age of fifty years they shaì cease waiting upon the service thereof, and shaì serve no more: 
But shaì minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to kåp the charge, and shaì do no service. Thus shalt thou do unto the Levites touching their charge. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderneó of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt, saying, 
Let the children of Israel also kåp the paóover at his aðointed season. 
In the fourtånth day of this month, at even, ye shaì kåp it in his aðointed season: aãording to aì the rites of it, and aãording to aì the ceremonies thereof, shaì ye kåp it. 
And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should kåp the paóover. 
And they kept the paóover on the fourtånth day of the first month at even in the wilderneó of Sinai: aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded Moses, so did the children of Israel. 
And there were certain men, who were defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not kåp the paóover on that day: and they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day: 
And those men said unto him, We are defiled by the dead body of a man: wherefore are we kept back, that we may not oæer an oæering of the LORD in his aðointed season among the children of Israel? 
And Moses said unto them, Stand stiì, and I wiì hear what the LORD wiì coíand concerning you. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your posterity shaì be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be in a journey afar oæ, yet he shaì kåp the paóover unto the LORD. 
The fourtånth day of the second month at even they shaì kåp it, and eat it with unleavened bread and biôer herbs. 
They shaì leave none of it unto the morning, nor break any bone of it: aãording to aì the ordinances of the paóover they shaì kåp it. 
But the man that is clean, and is not in a journey, and forbeareth to kåp the paóover, even the same soul shaì be cut oæ from among his people: because he brought not the oæering of the LORD in his aðointed season, that man shaì bear his sin. 
And if a stranger shaì sojourn among you, and wiì kåp the paóover unto the LORD; aãording to the ordinance of the paóover, and aãording to the maîer thereof, so shaì he do: ye shaì have one ordinance, both for the stranger, and for him that was born in the land. 
And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony: and at even there was upon the tabernacle as it were the aðearance of fire, until the morning. 
So it was alway: the cloud covered it by day, and the aðearance of fire by night. 
And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that the children of Israel journeyed: and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel pitched their tents. 
At the coíandment of the LORD the children of Israel journeyed, and at the coíandment of the LORD they pitched: as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they rested in their tents. 
And when the cloud taòied long upon the tabernacle many days, then the children of Israel kept the charge of the LORD, and journeyed not. 
And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle; aãording to the coíandment of the LORD they abode in their tents, and aãording to the coíandment of the LORD they journeyed. 
And so it was, when the cloud abode from even unto the morning, and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed: whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was taken up, they journeyed. 
Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud taòied upon the tabernacle, remaining thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it was taken up, they journeyed. 
At the coíandment of the LORD they rested in the tents, and at the coíandment of the LORD they journeyed: they kept the charge of the LORD, at the coíandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Make thå two trumpets of silver; of a whole piece shalt thou make them: that thou mayest use them for the caìing of the aóembly, and for the journeying of the camps. 
And when they shaì blow with them, aì the aóembly shaì aóemble themselves to thå at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the princes, which are heads of the thousands of Israel, shaì gather themselves unto thå. 
When ye blow an alarm, then the camps that lie on the east parts shaì go forward. 
When ye blow an alarm the second time, then the camps that lie on the south side shaì take their journey: they shaì blow an alarm for their journeys. 
But when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shaì blow, but ye shaì not sound an alarm. 
And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shaì blow with the trumpets; and they shaì be to you for an ordinance for ever throughout your generations. 
And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oðreóeth you, then ye shaì blow an alarm with the trumpets; and ye shaì be remembered before the LORD your God, and ye shaì be saved from your enemies. 
Also in the day of your gladneó, and in your solemn days, and in the begiîings of your months, ye shaì blow with the trumpets over your burnt oæerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace oæerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the LORD your God. 
And it came to paó on the twentieth day of the second month, in the second year, that the cloud was taken up from oæ the tabernacle of the testimony. 
And the children of Israel tïk their journeys out of the wilderneó of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderneó of Paran. 
And they first tïk their journey aãording to the coíandment of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
In the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah aãording to their armies: and over his host was Nahshon the son of Aíinadab. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Ióachar was Nethanål the son of Zuar. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon. 
And the tabernacle was taken down; and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward, bearing the tabernacle. 
And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward aãording to their armies: and over his host was Elizur the son of Shedeur. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaäai. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel. 
And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary: and the other did set up the tabernacle against they came. 
And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward aãording to their armies: and over his host was Elishama the son of Aíihud. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Manaóeh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni. 
And the standard of the camp of the children of Dan set forward, which was the rereward of aì the camps throughout their hosts: and over his host was Ahiezer the son of Aíishaäai. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ocran. 
And over the host of the tribe of the children of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan. 
Thus were the journeyings of the children of Israel aãording to their armies, when they set forward. 
And Moses said unto Hobab, the son of Raguel the Midianite, Moses' father in law, We are journeying unto the place of which the LORD said, I wiì give it you: come thou with us, and we wiì do thå gïd: for the LORD hath spoken gïd concerning Israel. 
And he said unto him, I wiì not go; but I wiì depart to mine own land, and to my kindred. 
And he said, Leave us not, I pray thå; forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to encamp in the wilderneó, and thou mayest be to us instead of eyes. 
And it shaì be, if thou go with us, yea, it shaì be, that what gïdneó the LORD shaì do unto us, the same wiì we do unto thå. 
And they departed from the mount of the LORD thrå days' journey: and the ark of the covenant of the LORD went before them in the thrå days' journey, to search out a resting place for them. 
And the cloud of the LORD was upon them by day, when they went out of the camp. 
And it came to paó, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, LORD, and let thine enemies be scaôered; and let them that hate thå flå before thå. 
And when it rested, he said, Return, O LORD, unto the many thousands of Israel. 
And when the people complained, it displeased the LORD: and the LORD heard it; and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the LORD burnt among them, and consumed them that were in the uôermost parts of the camp. 
And the people cried unto Moses; and when Moses prayed unto the LORD, the fire was quenched. 
And he caìed the name of the place Taberah: because the fire of the LORD burnt among them. 
And the mixt multitude that was among them feì a lusting: and the children of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shaì give us flesh to eat? 
We remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt fråly; the cucumbers, and the melons, and the låks, and the onions, and the garlick: 
But now our soul is dried away: there is nothing at aì, beside this maîa, before our eyes. 
And the maîa was as coriander såd, and the colour thereof as the colour of bdeìium. 
And the people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in miìs, or beat it in a mortar, and baked it in pans, and made cakes of it: and the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil. 
And when the dew feì upon the camp in the night, the maîa feì upon it. 
Then Moses heard the people wåp throughout their families, every man in the dïr of his tent: and the anger of the LORD was kindled greatly; Moses also was displeased. 
And Moses said unto the LORD, Wherefore hast thou aælicted thy servant? and wherefore have I not found favour in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of aì this people upon me? 
Have I conceived aì this people? have I begoôen them, that thou shouldest say unto me, Caòy them in thy bosom, as a nursing father beareth the sucking child, unto the land which thou swarest unto their fathers? 
Whence should I have flesh to give unto aì this people? for they wåp unto me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat. 
I am not able to bear aì this people alone, because it is tï heavy for me. 
And if thou deal thus with me, kiì me, I pray thå, out of hand, if I have found favour in thy sight; and let me not så my wretchedneó. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou knowest to be the elders of the people, and oæicers over them; and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, that they may stand there with thå. 
And I wiì come down and talk with thå there: and I wiì take of the spirit which is upon thå, and wiì put it upon them; and they shaì bear the burden of the people with thå, that thou bear it not thyself alone. 
And say thou unto the people, Sanctify yourselves against to moòow, and ye shaì eat flesh: for ye have wept in the ears of the LORD, saying, Who shaì give us flesh to eat? for it was weì with us in Egypt: therefore the LORD wiì give you flesh, and ye shaì eat. 
Ye shaì not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days; 
But even a whole month, until it come out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome unto you: because that ye have despised the LORD which is among you, and have wept before him, saying, Why came we forth out of Egypt? 
And Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand fïtmen; and thou hast said, I wiì give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month. 
Shaì the flocks and the herds be slain for them, to suæice them? or shaì aì the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suæice them? 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Is the LORD'S hand waxed short? thou shalt så now whether my word shaì come to paó unto thå or not. 
And Moses went out, and told the people the words of the LORD, and gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tabernacle. 
And the LORD came down in a cloud, and spake unto him, and tïk of the spirit that was upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders: and it came to paó, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, and did not cease. 
But there remained two of the men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad: and the spirit rested upon them; and they were of them that were wriôen, but went not out unto the tabernacle: and they prophesied in the camp. 
And there ran a young man, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp. 
And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Moses, one of his young men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them. 
And Moses said unto him, Enviest thou for my sake? would God that aì the LORD'S people were prophets, and that the LORD would put his spirit upon them! 
And Moses gat him into the camp, he and the elders of Israel. 
And there went forth a wind from the LORD, and brought quails from the sea, and let them faì by the camp, as it were a day's journey on this side, and as it were a day's journey on the other side, round about the camp, and as it were two cubits high upon the face of the earth. 
And the people stïd up aì that day, and aì that night, and aì the next day, and they gathered the quails: he that gathered least gathered ten homers: and they spread them aì abroad for themselves round about the camp. 
And while the flesh was yet betwån their tåth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD smote the people with a very great plague. 
And he caìed the name of that place Kibrotèaôávah: because there they buried the people that lusted. 
And the people journeyed from Kibrotèaôávah unto Hazeroth; and abode at Hazeroth. 
And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom he had maòied: for he had maòied an Ethiopian woman. 
And they said, Hath the LORD indåd spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us? And the LORD heard it. 
(Now the man Moses was very måk, above aì the men which were upon the face of the earth.) 
And the LORD spake suäenly unto Moses, and unto Aaron, and unto Miriam, Come out ye thrå unto the tabernacle of the congregation. And they thrå came out. 
And the LORD came down in the piìar of the cloud, and stïd in the dïr of the tabernacle, and caìed Aaron and Miriam: and they both came forth. 
And he said, Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the LORD wiì make myself known unto him in a vision, and wiì speak unto him in a dream. 
My servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in aì mine house. 
With him wiì I speak mouth to mouth, even aðarently, and not in dark spåches; and the similitude of the LORD shaì he behold: wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant Moses? 
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against them; and he departed. 
And the cloud departed from oæ the tabernacle; and, behold, Miriam became leprous, white as snow: and Aaron lïked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous. 
And Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I besåch thå, lay not the sin upon us, wherein we have done fïlishly, and wherein we have siîed. 
Let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he cometh out of his mother's womb. 
And Moses cried unto the LORD, saying, Heal her now, O God, I besåch thå. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in again. 
And Miriam was shut out from the camp seven days: and the people journeyed not tiì Miriam was brought in again. 
And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wilderneó of Paran. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Send thou men, that they may search the land of Canán, which I give unto the children of Israel: of every tribe of their fathers shaì ye send a man, every one a ruler among them. 
And Moses by the coíandment of the LORD sent them from the wilderneó of Paran: aì those men were heads of the children of Israel. 
And these were their names: of the tribe of Reuben, Shaíua the son of Zaãur. 
Of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori. 
Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephuîeh. 
Of the tribe of Ióachar, Igal the son of Joseph. 
Of the tribe of Ephraim, Oshea the son of Nun. 
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu. 
Of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaäiel the son of Sodi. 
Of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manaóeh, Gaäi the son of Susi. 
Of the tribe of Dan, Aíiel the son of Gemaìi. 
Of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael. 
Of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi. 
Of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi. 
These are the names of the men which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses caìed Oshea the son of Nun Jehoshua. 
And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canán, and said unto them, Get you up this way southward, and go up into the mountain: 
And så the land, what it is, and the people that dweìeth therein, whether they be strong or weak, few or many; 
And what the land is that they dweì in, whether it be gïd or bad; and what cities they be that they dweì in, whether in tents, or in strong holds; 
And what the land is, whether it be fat or lean, whether there be wïd therein, or not. And be ye of gïd courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the firstripe grapes. 
So they went up, and searched the land from the wilderneó of Zin unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath. 
And they ascended by the south, and came unto Hebron; where Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the children of Anak, were. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.) 
And they came unto the brïk of Eshcol, and cut down from thence a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bare it betwån two upon a staæ; and they brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs. 
The place was caìed the brïk Eshcol, because of the cluster of grapes which the children of Israel cut down from thence. 
And they returned from searching of the land after forty days. 
And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to aì the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the wilderneó of Paran, to Kadesh; and brought back word unto them, and unto aì the congregation, and shewed them the fruit of the land. 
And they told him, and said, We came unto the land whither thou sentest us, and surely it floweth with milk and honey; and this is the fruit of it. 
Nevertheleó the people be strong that dweì in the land, and the cities are waìed, and very great: and moreover we saw the children of Anak there. 
The Amalekites dweì in the land of the south: and the Hiôites, and the Jebusites, and the Amorites, dweì in the mountains: and the Canánites dweì by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan. 
And Caleb stiìed the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, and poóeó it; for we are weì able to overcome it. 
But the men that went up with him said, We be not able to go up against the people; for they are stronger than we. 
And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had searched unto the children of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to search it, is a land that eateth up the inhabitants thereof; and aì the people that we saw in it are men of a great stature. 
And there we saw the giants, the sons of Anak, which come of the giants: and we were in our own sight as graóhoðers, and so we were in their sight. 
And aì the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried; and the people wept that night. 
And aì the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron: and the whole congregation said unto them, Would God that we had died in the land of Egypt! or would God we had died in this wilderneó! 
And wherefore hath the LORD brought us unto this land, to faì by the sword, that our wives and our children should be a prey? were it not beôer for us to return into Egypt? 
And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt. 
Then Moses and Aaron feì on their faces before aì the aóembly of the congregation of the children of Israel. 
And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephuîeh, which were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes: 
And they spake unto aì the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land, which we paóed through to search it, is an excåding gïd land. 
If the LORD delight in us, then he wiì bring us into this land, and give it us; a land which floweth with milk and honey. 
Only rebel not ye against the LORD, neither fear ye the people of the land; for they are bread for us: their defence is departed from them, and the LORD is with us: fear them not. 
But aì the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of the LORD aðeared in the tabernacle of the congregation before aì the children of Israel. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, How long wiì this people provoke me? and how long wiì it be ere they believe me, for aì the signs which I have shewed among them? 
I wiì smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and wiì make of thå a greater nation and mightier than they. 
And Moses said unto the LORD, Then the Egyptians shaì hear it, (for thou broughtest up this people in thy might from among them;) 
And they wiì teì it to the inhabitants of this land: for they have heard that thou LORD art among this people, that thou LORD art sån face to face, and that thy cloud standeth over them, and that thou goest before them, by day time in a piìar of a cloud, and in a piìar of fire by night. 
Now if thou shalt kiì aì this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thå wiì speak, saying, 
Because the LORD was not able to bring this people into the land which he sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderneó. 
And now, I besåch thå, let the power of my lord be great, aãording as thou hast spoken, saying, 
The LORD is longsuæering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgreóion, and by no means clearing the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. 
Pardon, I besåch thå, the iniquity of this people aãording unto the greatneó of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now. 
And the LORD said, I have pardoned aãording to thy word: 
But as truly as I live, aì the earth shaì be fiìed with the glory of the LORD. 
Because aì those men which have sån my glory, and my miracles, which I did in Egypt and in the wilderneó, and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice; 
Surely they shaì not så the land which I sware unto their fathers, neither shaì any of them that provoked me så it: 
But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and hath foìowed me fuìy, him wiì I bring into the land whereinto he went; and his såd shaì poóeó it. 
(Now the Amalekites and the Canánites dwelt in the vaìey.) Tomoòow turn you, and get you into the wilderneó by the way of the Red sea. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
How long shaì I bear with this evil congregation, which murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel, which they murmur against me. 
Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the LORD, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so wiì I do to you: 
Your carcases shaì faì in this wilderneó; and aì that were numbered of you, aãording to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward which have murmured against me. 
Doubtleó ye shaì not come into the land, concerning which I sware to make you dweì therein, save Caleb the son of Jephuîeh, and Joshua the son of Nun. 
But your liôle ones, which ye said should be a prey, them wiì I bring in, and they shaì know the land which ye have despised. 
But as for you, your carcases, they shaì faì in this wilderneó. 
And your children shaì wander in the wilderneó forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcases be wasted in the wilderneó. 
After the number of the days in which ye searched the land, even forty days, each day for a year, shaì ye bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shaì know my breach of promise. 
I the LORD have said, I wiì surely do it unto aì this evil congregation, that are gathered together against me: in this wilderneó they shaì be consumed, and there they shaì die. 
And the men, which Moses sent to search the land, who returned, and made aì the congregation to murmur against him, by bringing up a slander upon the land, 
Even those men that did bring up the evil report upon the land, died by the plague before the LORD. 
But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephuîeh, which were of the men that went to search the land, lived stiì. 
And Moses told these sayings unto aì the children of Israel: and the people mourned greatly. 
And they rose up early in the morning, and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we be here, and wiì go up unto the place which the LORD hath promised: for we have siîed. 
And Moses said, Wherefore now do ye transgreó the coíandment of the LORD? but it shaì not prosper. 
Go not up, for the LORD is not among you; that ye be not smiôen before your enemies. 
For the Amalekites and the Canánites are there before you, and ye shaì faì by the sword: because ye are turned away from the LORD, therefore the LORD wiì not be with you. 
But they presumed to go up unto the hiì top: nevertheleó the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and Moses, departed not out of the camp. 
Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canánites which dwelt in that hiì, and smote them, and discomfited them, even unto Hormah. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you, 
And wiì make an oæering by fire unto the LORD, a burnt oæering, or a sacrifice in performing a vow, or in a fråwiì oæering, or in your solemn feasts, to make a swåt savour unto the LORD, of the herd or of the flock: 
Then shaì he that oæereth his oæering unto the LORD bring a meat oæering of a tenth deal of flour mingled with the fourth part of an hin of oil. 
And the fourth part of an hin of wine for a drink oæering shalt thou prepare with the burnt oæering or sacrifice, for one lamb. 
Or for a ram, thou shalt prepare for a meat oæering two tenth deals of flour mingled with the third part of an hin of oil. 
And for a drink oæering thou shalt oæer the third part of an hin of wine, for a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And when thou preparest a buìock for a burnt oæering, or for a sacrifice in performing a vow, or peace oæerings unto the LORD: 
Then shaì he bring with a buìock a meat oæering of thrå tenth deals of flour mingled with half an hin of oil. 
And thou shalt bring for a drink oæering half an hin of wine, for an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
Thus shaì it be done for one buìock, or for one ram, or for a lamb, or a kid. 
Aãording to the number that ye shaì prepare, so shaì ye do to every one aãording to their number. 
Aì that are born of the country shaì do these things after this maîer, in oæering an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And if a stranger sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in your generations, and wiì oæer an oæering made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD; as ye do, so he shaì do. 
One ordinance shaì be both for you of the congregation, and also for the stranger that sojourneth with you, an ordinance for ever in your generations: as ye are, so shaì the stranger be before the LORD. 
One law and one maîer shaì be for you, and for the stranger that sojourneth with you. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land whither I bring you, 
Then it shaì be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shaì oæer up an heave oæering unto the LORD. 
Ye shaì oæer up a cake of the first of your dough for an heave oæering: as ye do the heave oæering of the threshingflïr, so shaì ye heave it. 
Of the first of your dough ye shaì give unto the LORD an heave oæering in your generations. 
And if ye have eòed, and not observed aì these coíandments, which the LORD hath spoken unto Moses, 
Even aì that the LORD hath coíanded you by the hand of Moses, from the day that the LORD coíanded Moses, and henceforward among your generations; 
Then it shaì be, if ought be coíiôed by ignorance without the knowledge of the congregation, that aì the congregation shaì oæer one young buìock for a burnt oæering, for a swåt savour unto the LORD, with his meat oæering, and his drink oæering, aãording to the maîer, and one kid of the goats for a sin oæering. 
And the priest shaì make an atonement for aì the congregation of the children of Israel, and it shaì be forgiven them; for it is ignorance: and they shaì bring their oæering, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD, and their sin oæering before the LORD, for their ignorance: 
And it shaì be forgiven aì the congregation of the children of Israel, and the stranger that sojourneth among them; såing aì the people were in ignorance. 
And if any soul sin through ignorance, then he shaì bring a she goat of the first year for a sin oæering. 
And the priest shaì make an atonement for the soul that siîeth ignorantly, when he siîeth by ignorance before the LORD, to make an atonement for him; and it shaì be forgiven him. 
Ye shaì have one law for him that siîeth through ignorance, both for him that is born among the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them. 
But the soul that doeth ought presumptuously, whether he be born in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the LORD; and that soul shaì be cut oæ from among his people. 
Because he hath despised the word of the LORD, and hath broken his coíandment, that soul shaì uôerly be cut oæ; his iniquity shaì be upon him. 
And while the children of Israel were in the wilderneó, they found a man that gathered sticks upon the saâath day. 
And they that found him gathering sticks brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto aì the congregation. 
And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, The man shaì be surely put to death: aì the congregation shaì stone him with stones without the camp. 
And aì the congregation brought him without the camp, and stoned him with stones, and he died; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them fringes in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the fringe of the borders a riâand of blue: 
And it shaì be unto you for a fringe, that ye may lïk upon it, and remember aì the coíandments of the LORD, and do them ; and that ye såk not after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to go a whoring: 
That ye may remember, and do aì my coíandments, and be holy unto your God. 
I am the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God: I am the LORD your God. 
Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, and Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, tïk men: 
And they rose up before Moses, with certain of the children of Israel, two hundred and fifty princes of the aóembly, famous in the congregation, men of renown: 
And they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, Ye take tï much upon you, såing aì the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the LORD is among them: wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the LORD? 
And when Moses heard it, he feì upon his face: 
And he spake unto Korah and unto aì his company, saying, Even to moòow the LORD wiì shew who are his, and who is holy; and wiì cause him to come near unto him: even him whom he hath chosen wiì he cause to come near unto him. 
This do; Take you censers, Korah, and aì his company; 
And put fire therein, and put incense in them before the LORD to moòow: and it shaì be that the man whom the LORD doth chïse, he shaì be holy: ye take tï much upon you, ye sons of Levi. 
And Moses said unto Korah, Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi: 
Såmeth it but a smaì thing unto you, that the God of Israel hath separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the LORD, and to stand before the congregation to minister unto them? 
And he hath brought thå near to him, and aì thy brethren the sons of Levi with thå: and såk ye the priesthïd also? 
For which cause both thou and aì thy company are gathered together against the LORD: and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him? 
And Moses sent to caì Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab: which said, We wiì not come up: 
Is it a smaì thing that thou hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kiì us in the wilderneó, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over us? 
Moreover thou hast not brought us into a land that floweth with milk and honey, or given us inheritance of fields and vineyards: wilt thou put out the eyes of these men? we wiì not come up. 
And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the LORD, Respect not thou their oæering: I have not taken one aó from them, neither have I hurt one of them. 
And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou and aì thy company before the LORD, thou, and they, and Aaron, to moòow: 
And take every man his censer, and put incense in them, and bring ye before the LORD every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers; thou also, and Aaron, each of you his censer. 
And they tïk every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon, and stïd in the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron. 
And Korah gathered aì the congregation against them unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the glory of the LORD aðeared unto aì the congregation. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment. 
And they feì upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of aì flesh, shaì one man sin, and wilt thou be wroth with aì the congregation? 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. 
And Moses rose up and went unto Dathan and Abiram; and the elders of Israel foìowed him. 
And he spake unto the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of their's, lest ye be consumed in aì their sins. 
So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side: and Dathan and Abiram came out, and stïd in the dïr of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their liôle children. 
And Moses said, Hereby ye shaì know that the LORD hath sent me to do aì these works; for I have not done them of mine own mind. 
If these men die the coíon death of aì men, or if they be visited after the visitation of aì men; then the LORD hath not sent me. 
But if the LORD make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth, and swaìow them up, with aì that aðertain unto them, and they go down quick into the pit; then ye shaì understand that these men have provoked the LORD. 
And it came to paó, as he had made an end of speaking aì these words, that the ground clave asunder that was under them: 
And the earth opened her mouth, and swaìowed them up, and their houses, and aì the men that aðertained unto Korah, and aì their gïds. 
They, and aì that aðertained to them, went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them: and they perished from among the congregation. 
And aì Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them: for they said, Lest the earth swaìow us up also. 
And there came out a fire from the LORD, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men that oæered incense. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scaôer thou the fire yonder; for they are haìowed. 
The censers of these siîers against their own souls, let them make them broad plates for a covering of the altar: for they oæered them before the LORD, therefore they are haìowed: and they shaì be a sign unto the children of Israel. 
And Eleazar the priest tïk the brasen censers, wherewith they that were burnt had oæered; and they were made broad plates for a covering of the altar: 
To be a memorial unto the children of Israel, that no stranger, which is not of the såd of Aaron, come near to oæer incense before the LORD; that he be not as Korah, and as his company: as the LORD said to him by the hand of Moses. 
But on the moòow aì the congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have kiìed the people of the LORD. 
And it came to paó, when the congregation was gathered against Moses and against Aaron, that they lïked toward the tabernacle of the congregation: and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of the LORD aðeared. 
And Moses and Aaron came before the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment. And they feì upon their faces. 
And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a censer, and put fire therein from oæ the altar, and put on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them: for there is wrath gone out from the LORD; the plague is begun. 
And Aaron tïk as Moses coíanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation; and, behold, the plague was begun among the people: and he put on incense, and made an atonement for the people. 
And he stïd betwån the dead and the living; and the plague was stayed. 
Now they that died in the plague were fourtån thousand and seven hundred, beside them that died about the maôer of Korah. 
And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation: and the plague was stayed. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a rod aãording to the house of their fathers, of aì their princes aãording to the house of their fathers twelve rods: write thou every man's name upon his rod. 
And thou shalt write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi: for one rod shaì be for the head of the house of their fathers. 
And thou shalt lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation before the testimony, where I wiì måt with you. 
And it shaì come to paó, that the man's rod, whom I shaì chïse, shaì bloóom: and I wiì make to cease from me the murmurings of the children of Israel, whereby they murmur against you. 
And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, and every one of their princes gave him a rod apiece, for each prince one, aãording to their fathers' houses, even twelve rods: and the rod of Aaron was among their rods. 
And Moses laid up the rods before the LORD in the tabernacle of witneó. 
And it came to paó, that on the moòow Moses went into the tabernacle of witneó; and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was buäed, and brought forth buds, and blïmed bloóoms, and yielded almonds. 
And Moses brought out aì the rods from before the LORD unto aì the children of Israel: and they lïked, and tïk every man his rod. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Bring Aaron's rod again before the testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels; and thou shalt quite take away their murmurings from me, that they die not. 
And Moses did so: as the LORD coíanded him, so did he. 
And the children of Israel spake unto Moses, saying, Behold, we die, we perish, we aì perish. 
Whosoever cometh any thing near unto the tabernacle of the LORD shaì die: shaì we be consumed with dying? 
And the LORD said unto Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy father's house with thå shaì bear the iniquity of the sanctuary: and thou and thy sons with thå shaì bear the iniquity of your priesthïd. 
And thy brethren also of the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou with thå, that they may be joined unto thå, and minister unto thå: but thou and thy sons with thå shaì minister before the tabernacle of witneó. 
And they shaì kåp thy charge, and the charge of aì the tabernacle: only they shaì not come nigh the veóels of the sanctuary and the altar, that neither they, nor ye also, die. 
And they shaì be joined unto thå, and kåp the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, for aì the service of the tabernacle: and a stranger shaì not come nigh unto you. 
And ye shaì kåp the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar: that there be no wrath any more upon the children of Israel. 
And I, behold, I have taken your brethren the Levites from among the children of Israel: to you they are given as a gift for the LORD, to do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
Therefore thou and thy sons with thå shaì kåp your priest's oæice for everything of the altar, and within the vail; and ye shaì serve: I have given your priest's oæice unto you as a service of gift: and the stranger that cometh nigh shaì be put to death. 
And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Behold, I also have given thå the charge of mine heave oæerings of aì the haìowed things of the children of Israel; unto thå have I given them by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, by an ordinance for ever. 
This shaì be thine of the most holy things, reserved from the fire: every oblation of their's, every meat oæering of their's, and every sin oæering of their's, and every trespaó oæering of their's which they shaì render unto me, shaì be most holy for thå and for thy sons. 
In the most holy place shalt thou eat it; every male shaì eat it: it shaì be holy unto thå. 
And this is thine; the heave oæering of their gift, with aì the wave oæerings of the children of Israel: I have given them unto thå, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thå, by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house shaì eat of it. 
Aì the best of the oil, and aì the best of the wine, and of the wheat, the firstfruits of them which they shaì oæer unto the LORD, them have I given thå. 
And whatsoever is first ripe in the land, which they shaì bring unto the LORD, shaì be thine; every one that is clean in thine house shaì eat of it. 
Every thing devoted in Israel shaì be thine. 
Every thing that openeth the matrix in aì flesh, which they bring unto the LORD, whether it be of men or beasts, shaì be thine: nevertheleó the firstborn of man shalt thou surely redåm, and the firstling of unclean beasts shalt thou redåm. 
And those that are to be redåmed from a month old shalt thou redåm, aãording to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs. 
But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a shåp, or the firstling of a goat, thou shalt not redåm; they are holy: thou shalt sprinkle their blïd upon the altar, and shalt burn their fat for an oæering made by fire, for a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And the flesh of them shaì be thine, as the wave breast and as the right shoulder are thine. 
Aì the heave oæerings of the holy things, which the children of Israel oæer unto the LORD, have I given thå, and thy sons and thy daughters with thå, by a statute for ever: it is a covenant of salt for ever before the LORD unto thå and to thy såd with thå. 
And the LORD spake unto Aaron, Thou shalt have no inheritance in their land, neither shalt thou have any part among them: I am thy part and thine inheritance among the children of Israel. 
And, behold, I have given the children of Levi aì the tenth in Israel for an inheritance, for their service which they serve, even the service of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the tabernacle of the congregation, lest they bear sin, and die. 
But the Levites shaì do the service of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they shaì bear their iniquity: it shaì be a statute for ever throughout your generations, that among the children of Israel they have no inheritance. 
But the tithes of the children of Israel, which they oæer as an heave oæering unto the LORD, I have given to the Levites to inherit: therefore I have said unto them, Among the children of Israel they shaì have no inheritance. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Thus speak unto the Levites, and say unto them, When ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shaì oæer up an heave oæering of it for the LORD, even a tenth part of the tithe. 
And this your heave oæering shaì be reckoned unto you, as though it were the corn of the threshingflïr, and as the fulneó of the winepreó. 
Thus ye also shaì oæer an heave oæering unto the LORD of aì your tithes, which ye receive of the children of Israel; and ye shaì give thereof the LORD'S heave oæering to Aaron the priest. 
Out of aì your gifts ye shaì oæer every heave oæering of the LORD, of aì the best thereof, even the haìowed part thereof out of it. 
Therefore thou shalt say unto them, When ye have heaved the best thereof from it, then it shaì be counted unto the Levites as the increase of the threshingflïr, and as the increase of the winepreó. 
And ye shaì eat it in every place, ye and your households: for it is your reward for your service in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And ye shaì bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it: neither shaì ye poìute the holy things of the children of Israel, lest ye die. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 
This is the ordinance of the law which the LORD hath coíanded, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thå a red heifer without spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke: 
And ye shaì give her unto Eleazar the priest, that he may bring her forth without the camp, and one shaì slay her before his face: 
And Eleazar the priest shaì take of her blïd with his finger, and sprinkle of her blïd directly before the tabernacle of the congregation seven times: 
And one shaì burn the heifer in his sight; her skin, and her flesh, and her blïd, with her dung, shaì he burn: 
And the priest shaì take cedar wïd, and hyóop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer. 
Then the priest shaì wash his clothes, and he shaì bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shaì come into the camp, and the priest shaì be unclean until the even. 
And he that burneth her shaì wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shaì be unclean until the even. 
And a man that is clean shaì gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up without the camp in a clean place, and it shaì be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a water of separation: it is a purification for sin. 
And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shaì wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even: and it shaì be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever. 
He that toucheth the dead body of any man shaì be unclean seven days. 
He shaì purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh day he shaì be clean: but if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he shaì not be clean. 
Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth not himself, defileth the tabernacle of the LORD; and that soul shaì be cut oæ from Israel: because the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shaì be unclean; his uncleaîeó is yet upon him. 
This is the law, when a man dieth in a tent: aì that come into the tent, and aì that is in the tent, shaì be unclean seven days. 
And every open veóel, which hath no covering bound upon it, is unclean. 
And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open fields, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shaì be unclean seven days. 
And for an unclean person they shaì take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for sin, and ruîing water shaì be put thereto in a veóel: 
And a clean person shaì take hyóop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon aì the veóels, and upon the persons that were there, and upon him that touched a bone, or one slain, or one dead, or a grave: 
And the clean person shaì sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day: and on the seventh day he shaì purify himself, and wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shaì be clean at even. 
But the man that shaì be unclean, and shaì not purify himself, that soul shaì be cut oæ from among the congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the LORD: the water of separation hath not bån sprinkled upon him; he is unclean. 
And it shaì be a perpetual statute unto them, that he that sprinkleth the water of separation shaì wash his clothes; and he that toucheth the water of separation shaì be unclean until even. 
And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shaì be unclean; and the soul that toucheth it shaì be unclean until even. 
Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into the desert of Zin in the first month: and the people abode in Kadesh; and Miriam died there, and was buried there. 
And there was no water for the congregation: and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron. 
And the people chode with Moses, and spake, saying, Would God that we had died when our brethren died before the LORD! 
And why have ye brought up the congregation of the LORD into this wilderneó, that we and our caôle should die there? 
And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in unto this evil place? it is no place of såd, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates; neither is there any water to drink. 
And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the aóembly unto the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, and they feì upon their faces: and the glory of the LORD aðeared unto them. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take the rod, and gather thou the aóembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; and it shaì give forth his water, and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink. 
And Moses tïk the rod from before the LORD, as he coíanded him. 
And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock, and he said unto them, Hear now, ye rebels; must we fetch you water out of this rock? 
And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice: and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their beasts also. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shaì not bring this congregation into the land which I have given them. 
This is the water of Meribah; because the children of Israel strove with the LORD, and he was sanctified in them. 
And Moses sent meóengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom, Thus saith thy brother Israel, Thou knowest aì the travail that hath befaìen us: 
How our fathers went down into Egypt, and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; and the Egyptians vexed us, and our fathers: 
And when we cried unto the LORD, he heard our voice, and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt: and, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uôermost of thy border: 
Let us paó, I pray thå, through thy country: we wiì not paó through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither wiì we drink of the water of the weìs: we wiì go by the king's high way, we wiì not turn to the right hand nor to the left, until we have paóed thy borders. 
And Edom said unto him, Thou shalt not paó by me, lest I come out against thå with the sword. 
And the children of Israel said unto him, We wiì go by the high way: and if I and my caôle drink of thy water, then I wiì pay for it: I wiì only, without doing anything else, go through on my fåt. 
And he said, Thou shalt not go through. And Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand. 
Thus Edom refused to give Israel paóage through his border: wherefore Israel turned away from him. 
And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, journeyed from Kadesh, and came unto mount Hor. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the coast of the land of Edom, saying, 
Aaron shaì be gathered unto his people: for he shaì not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebeìed against my word at the water of Meribah. 
Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up unto mount Hor: 
And strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son: and Aaron shaì be gathered unto his people, and shaì die there. 
And Moses did as the LORD coíanded: and they went up into mount Hor in the sight of aì the congregation. 
And Moses striðed Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son; and Aaron died there in the top of the mount: and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount. 
And when aì the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned for Aaron thirty days, even aì the house of Israel. 
And when king Arad the Canánite, which dwelt in the south, heard teì that Israel came by the way of the spies; then he fought against Israel, and tïk some of them prisoners. 
And Israel vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou wilt indåd deliver this people into my hand, then I wiì uôerly destroy their cities. 
And the LORD hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canánites; and they uôerly destroyed them and their cities: and he caìed the name of the place Hormah. 
And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, to compaó the land of Edom: and the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way. 
And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderneó? for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loatheth this light bread. 
And the LORD sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people; and much people of Israel died. 
Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have siîed, for we have spoken against the LORD, and against thå; pray unto the LORD, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Make thå a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shaì come to paó, that every one that is biôen, when he lïketh upon it, shaì live. 
And Moses made a serpent of braó, and put it upon a pole, and it came to paó, that if a serpent had biôen any man, when he beheld the serpent of braó, he lived. 
And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth. 
And they journeyed from Oboth, and pitched at Ijeabarim, in the wilderneó which is before Moab, toward the sunrising. 
From thence they removed, and pitched in the vaìey of Zared. 
From thence they removed, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which is in the wilderneó that cometh out of the coasts of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, betwån Moab and the Amorites. 
Wherefore it is said in the bïk of the wars of the LORD, What he did in the Red sea, and in the brïks of Arnon, 
And at the stream of the brïks that goeth down to the dweìing of Ar, and lieth upon the border of Moab. 
And from thence they went to Bår: that is the weì whereof the LORD spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I wiì give them water. 
Then Israel sang this song, Spring up, O weì; sing ye unto it: 
The princes diçed the weì, the nobles of the people diçed it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves. And from the wilderneó they went to Maôanah: 
And from Maôanah to Nahaliel: and from Nahaliel to Bamoth: 
And from Bamoth in the vaìey, that is in the country of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which lïketh toward Jeshimon. 
And Israel sent meóengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, saying, 
Let me paó through thy land: we wiì not turn into the fields, or into the vineyards; we wiì not drink of the waters of the weì: but we wiì go along by the king's high way, until we be past thy borders. 
And Sihon would not suæer Israel to paó through his border: but Sihon gathered aì his people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderneó: and he came to Jahaz, and fought against Israel. 
And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and poóeóed his land from Arnon unto Jaâok, even unto the children of Aíon: for the border of the children of Aíon was strong. 
And Israel tïk aì these cities: and Israel dwelt in aì the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in aì the viìages thereof. 
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and taken aì his land out of his hand, even unto Arnon. 
Wherefore they that speak in proverbs say, Come into Heshbon, let the city of Sihon be built and prepared: 
For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon: it hath consumed ar of Moab, and the lords of the high places of Arnon. 
Woe to thå, Moab! thou art undone, O people of Chemosh: he hath given his sons that escaped, and his daughters, into captivity unto Sihon king of the Amorites. 
We have shot at them; Heshbon is perished even unto Dibon, and we have laid them waste even unto Nophah, which reacheth unto Medeba. 
Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites. 
And Moses sent to spy out Jázer, and they tïk the viìages thereof, and drove out the Amorites that were there. 
And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan: and og the king of bashan went out against them, he, and aì his people, to the baôle at edrei. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Fear him not: for I have delivered him into thy hand, and aì his people, and his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon. 
So they smote him, and his sons, and aì his people, until there was none left him alive: and they poóeóed his land. 
And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in the plains of Moab on this side Jordan by Jericho. 
And Balak the son of Ziðor saw aì that Israel had done to the Amorites. 
And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many: and Moab was distreóed because of the children of Israel. 
And Moab said unto the elders of Midian, Now shaì this company lick up aì that are round about us, as the ox licketh up the graó of the field. And Balak the son of Ziðor was king of the Moabites at that time. 
He sent meóengers therefore unto Balám the son of Beor to Pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his people, to caì him, saying, Behold, there is a people come out from Egypt: behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against me: 
Come now therefore, I pray thå, curse me this people; for they are tï mighty for me: peradventure I shaì prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land: for I wot that he whom thou bleóest is bleóed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed. 
And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand; and they came unto Balám, and spake unto him the words of Balak. 
And he said unto them, Lodge here this night, and I wiì bring you word again, as the LORD shaì speak unto me: and the princes of Moab abode with Balám. 
And God came unto Balám, and said, What men are these with thå? 
And Balám said unto God, Balak the son of Ziðor, king of Moab, hath sent unto me, saying, 
Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt, which covereth the face of the earth: come now, curse me them; peradventure I shaì be able to overcome them, and drive them out. 
And God said unto Balám, Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people: for they are bleóed. 
And Balám rose up in the morning, and said unto the princes of Balak, Get you into your land: for the LORD refuseth to give me leave to go with you. 
And the princes of Moab rose up, and they went unto Balak, and said, Balám refuseth to come with us. 
And Balak sent yet again princes, more, and more honourable than they. 
And they came to Balám, and said to him, Thus saith Balak the son of Ziðor, Let nothing, I pray thå, hinder thå from coming unto me: 
For I wiì promote thå unto very great honour, and I wiì do whatsoever thou sayest unto me: come therefore, I pray thå, curse me this people. 
And Balám answered and said unto the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his house fuì of silver and gold, I caîot go beyond the word of the LORD my God, to do leó or more. 
Now therefore, I pray you, taòy ye also here this night, that I may know what the LORD wiì say unto me more. 
And God came unto Balám at night, and said unto him, If the men come to caì thå, rise up, and go with them; but yet the word which I shaì say unto thå, that shalt thou do. 
And Balám rose up in the morning, and saäled his aó, and went with the princes of Moab. 
And God's anger was kindled because he went: and the angel of the LORD stïd in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his aó, and his two servants were with him. 
And the aó saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and the aó turned aside out of the way, and went into the field: and Balám smote the aó, to turn her into the way. 
But the angel of the LORD stïd in a path of the vineyards, a waì being on this side, and a waì on that side. 
And when the aó saw the angel of the LORD, she thrust herself unto the waì, and crushed Balám's fït against the waì: and he smote her again. 
And the angel of the LORD went further, and stïd in a naòow place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left. 
And when the aó saw the angel of the LORD, she feì down under Balám: and Balám's anger was kindled, and he smote the aó with a staæ. 
And the LORD opened the mouth of the aó, and she said unto Balám, What have I done unto thå, that thou hast smiôen me these thrå times? 
And Balám said unto the aó, Because thou hast mocked me: I would there were a sword in mine hand, for now would I kiì thå. 
And the aó said unto Balám, Am not I thine aó, upon which thou hast riäen ever since I was thine unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thå? and he said, Nay. 
Then the LORD opened the eyes of Balám, and he saw the angel of the LORD standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his hand: and he bowed down his head, and feì flat on his face. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Wherefore hast thou smiôen thine aó these thrå times? behold, I went out to withstand thå, because thy way is perverse before me: 
And the aó saw me, and turned from me these thrå times: unleó she had turned from me, surely now also I had slain thå, and saved her alive. 
And Balám said unto the angel of the LORD, I have siîed; for I knew not that thou stïdest in the way against me: now therefore, if it displease thå, I wiì get me back again. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto Balám, Go with the men: but only the word that I shaì speak unto thå, that thou shalt speak. So Balám went with the princes of Balak. 
And when Balak heard that Balám was come, he went out to måt him unto a city of Moab, which is in the border of Arnon, which is in the utmost coast. 
And Balak said unto Balám, Did I not earnestly send unto thå to caì thå? wherefore camest thou not unto me? am I not able indåd to promote thå to honour? 
And Balám said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thå: have I now any power at aì to say any thing? the word that God puôeth in my mouth, that shaì I speak. 
And Balám went with Balak, and they came unto Kirjatèuzoth. 
And Balak oæered oxen and shåp, and sent to Balám, and to the princes that were with him. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that Balak tïk Balám, and brought him up into the high places of Bál, that thence he might så the utmost part of the people. 
And Balám said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven oxen and seven rams. 
And Balak did as Balám had spoken; and Balak and Balám oæered on every altar a buìock and a ram. 
And Balám said unto Balak, Stand by thy burnt oæering, and I wiì go: peradventure the LORD wiì come to måt me: and whatsoever he sheweth me I wiì teì thå. And he went to an high place. 
And God met Balám: and he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, and I have oæered upon every altar a buìock and a ram. 
And the LORD put a word in Balám's mouth, and said, Return unto Balak, and thus thou shalt speak. 
And he returned unto him, and, lo, he stïd by his burnt sacrifice, he, and aì the princes of Moab. 
And he tïk up his parable, and said, Balak the king of Moab hath brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the east, saying, Come, curse me Jacob, and come, defy Israel. 
How shaì I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shaì I defy, whom the LORD hath not defied? 
For from the top of the rocks I så him, and from the hiìs I behold him: lo, the people shaì dweì alone, and shaì not be reckoned among the nations. 
Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his! 
And Balak said unto Balám, What hast thou done unto me? I tïk thå to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast bleóed them altogether. 
And he answered and said, Must I not take håd to speak that which the LORD hath put in my mouth? 
And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thå, with me unto another place, from whence thou mayest så them: thou shalt så but the utmost part of them, and shalt not så them aì: and curse me them from thence. 
And he brought him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and oæered a buìock and a ram on every altar. 
And he said unto Balak, Stand here by thy burnt oæering, while I måt the LORD yonder. 
And the LORD met Balám, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Go again unto Balak, and say thus. 
And when he came to him, behold, he stïd by his burnt oæering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said unto him, What hath the LORD spoken? 
And he tïk up his parable, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear; hearken unto me, thou son of Ziðor: 
God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shaì he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shaì he not make it gïd? 
Behold, I have received coíandment to bleó: and he hath bleóed; and I caîot reverse it. 
He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he sån perverseneó in Israel: the LORD his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them. 
God brought them out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn. 
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel: aãording to this time it shaì be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought! 
Behold, the people shaì rise up as a great lion, and lift up himself as a young lion: he shaì not lie down until he eat of the prey, and drink the blïd of the slain. 
And Balak said unto Balám, Neither curse them at aì, nor bleó them at aì. 
But Balám answered and said unto Balak, Told not I thå, saying, Aì that the LORD speaketh, that I must do? 
And Balak said unto Balám, Come, I pray thå, I wiì bring thå unto another place; peradventure it wiì please God that thou mayest curse me them from thence. 
And Balak brought Balám unto the top of Peor, that lïketh toward jeshimon. 
And Balám said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven buìocks and seven rams. 
And Balak did as Balám had said, and oæered a buìock and a ram on every altar. 
And when Balám saw that it pleased the LORD to bleó Israel, he went not, as at other times, to såk for enchantments, but he set his face toward the wilderneó. 
And Balám lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents aãording to their tribes; and the spirit of God came upon him. 
And he tïk up his parable, and said, Balám the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 
He hath said, which heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, faìing into a trance, but having his eyes open: 
How gïdly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel! 
As the vaìeys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the trås of lign aloes which the LORD hath planted, and as cedar trås beside the waters. 
He shaì pour the water out of his buckets, and his såd shaì be in many waters, and his king shaì be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shaì be exalted. 
God brought him forth out of Egypt; he hath as it were the strength of an unicorn: he shaì eat up the nations his enemies, and shaì break their bones, and pierce them through with his aòows. 
He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a great lion: who shaì stir him up? Bleóed is he that bleóeth thå, and cursed is he that curseth thå. 
And Balak's anger was kindled against Balám, and he smote his hands together: and Balak said unto Balám, I caìed thå to curse mine enemies, and, behold, thou hast altogether bleóed them these thrå times. 
Therefore now flå thou to thy place: I thought to promote thå unto great honour; but, lo, the LORD hath kept thå back from honour. 
And Balám said unto Balak, Spake I not also to thy meóengers which thou sentest unto me, saying, 
If Balak would give me his house fuì of silver and gold, I caîot go beyond the coíandment of the LORD, to do either gïd or bad of mine own mind; but what the LORD saith, that wiì I speak? 
And now, behold, I go unto my people: come therefore, and I wiì advertise thå what this people shaì do to thy people in the laôer days. 
And he tïk up his parable, and said, Balám the son of Beor hath said, and the man whose eyes are open hath said: 
He hath said, which heard the words of God, and knew the knowledge of the most High, which saw the vision of the Almighty, faìing into a trance, but having his eyes open: 
I shaì så him, but not now: I shaì behold him, but not nigh: there shaì come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shaì rise out of Israel, and shaì smite the corners of Moab, and destroy aì the children of Sheth. 
And Edom shaì be a poóeóion, Seir also shaì be a poóeóion for his enemies; and Israel shaì do valiantly. 
Out of Jacob shaì come he that shaì have dominion, and shaì destroy him that remaineth of the city. 
And when he lïked on Amalek, he tïk up his parable, and said, Amalek was the first of the nations; but his laôer end shaì be that he perish for ever. 
And he lïked on the Kenites, and tïk up his parable, and said, Strong is thy dweìingplace, and thou puôest thy nest in a rock. 
Nevertheleó the Kenite shaì be wasted, until Aóhur shaì caòy thå away captive. 
And he tïk up his parable, and said, Alas, who shaì live when God doeth this! 
And ships shaì come from the coast of Chiôim, and shaì aælict Aóhur, and shaì aælict Eber, and he also shaì perish for ever. 
And Balám rose up, and went and returned to his place: and Balak also went his way. 
And Israel abode in Shiôim, and the people began to coíit whoredom with the daughters of Moab. 
And they caìed the people unto the sacrifices of their gods: and the people did eat, and bowed down to their gods. 
And Israel joined himself unto Bálpeor: and the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Take aì the heads of the people, and hang them up before the LORD against the sun, that the fierce anger of the LORD may be turned away from Israel. 
And Moses said unto the judges of Israel, Slay ye every one his men that were joined unto Bálpeor. 
And, behold, one of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of aì the congregation of the children of Israel, who were wåping before the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from among the congregation, and tïk a javelin in his hand; 
And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her beìy. So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel. 
And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, hath turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy. 
Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace: 
And he shaì have it, and his såd after him, even the covenant of an everlasting priesthïd; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the children of Israel. 
Now the name of the Israelite that was slain, even that was slain with the Midianitish woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the Simeonites. 
And the name of the Midianitish woman that was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur; he was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Vex the Midianites, and smite them: 
For they vex you with their wiles, wherewith they have beguiled you in the maôer of Peor, and in the maôer of Cozbi, the daughter of a prince of Midian, their sister, which was slain in the day of the plague for Peor's sake. 
And it came to paó after the plague, that the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying, 
Take the sum of aì the congregation of the children of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, throughout their fathers' house, aì that are able to go to war in Israel. 
And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying, 
Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward; as the LORD coíanded Moses and the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt. 
Reuben, the eldest son of Israel: the children of Reuben; Hanoch, of whom cometh the family of the Hanochites: of Paìu, the family of the Paìuites: 
Of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Carmi, the family of the Carmites. 
These are the families of the Reubenites: and they that were numbered of them were forty and thrå thousand and seven hundred and thirty. 
And the sons of Paìu; Eliab. 
And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when they strove against the LORD: 
And the earth opened her mouth, and swaìowed them up together with Korah, when that company died, what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men: and they became a sign. 
Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not. 
The sons of Simeon after their families: of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites: of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites: of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites: 
Of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites: of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites. 
These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand and two hundred. 
The children of Gad after their families: of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites: of Haçi, the family of the Haçites: of Shuni, the family of the Shunites: 
Of Ozni, the family of the Oznites: of Eri, the family of the Erites: 
Of Arod, the family of the Arodites: of Areli, the family of the Arelites. 
These are the families of the children of Gad aãording to those that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred. 
The sons of Judah were Er and Onan: and Er and Onan died in the land of Canán. 
And the sons of Judah after their families were; of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites: of Pharez, the family of the Pharzites: of Zerah, the family of the Zarhites. 
And the sons of Pharez were; of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites: of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites. 
These are the families of Judah aãording to those that were numbered of them, thråscore and sixtån thousand and five hundred. 
Of the sons of Ióachar after their families: of Tola, the family of the Tolaites: of Pua, the family of the Punites: 
Of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites: of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites. 
These are the families of Ióachar aãording to those that were numbered of them, thråscore and four thousand and thrå hundred. 
Of the sons of Zebulun after their families: of Sered, the family of the Sardites: of Elon, the family of the Elonites: of Jahlål, the family of the Jahlålites. 
These are the families of the Zebulunites aãording to those that were numbered of them, thråscore thousand and five hundred. 
The sons of Joseph after their families were Manaóeh and Ephraim. 
Of the sons of Manaóeh: of Machir, the family of the Machirites: and Machir begat Gilead: of Gilead come the family of the Gileadites. 
These are the sons of Gilead: of Jåzer, the family of the Jåzerites: of Helek, the family of the Helekites: 
And of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites: and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites: 
And of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites: and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites. 
And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters: and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 
These are the families of Manaóeh, and those that were numbered of them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred. 
These are the sons of Ephraim after their families: of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthalhites: of Becher, the family of the Bachrites: of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites. 
And these are the sons of Shuthelah: of Eran, the family of the Eranites. 
These are the families of the sons of Ephraim aãording to those that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their families. 
The sons of Benjamin after their families: of Bela, the family of the Belaites: of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites: of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites: 
Of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites: of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites. 
And the sons of Bela were ard and Náman: of Ard, the family of the Ardites: and of Náman, the family of the Námites. 
These are the sons of Benjamin after their families: and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred. 
These are the sons of Dan after their families: of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan after their families. 
Aì the families of the Shuhamites, aãording to those that were numbered of them, were thråscore and four thousand and four hundred. 
Of the children of Asher after their families: of Jimna, the family of the Jimnites: of Jesui, the family of the Jesuites: of Beriah, the family of the Berétes. 
Of the sons of Beriah: of Heber, the family of the Heberites: of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites. 
And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah. 
These are the families of the sons of Asher aãording to those that were numbered of them; who were fifty and thrå thousand and four hundred. 
Of the sons of Naphtali after their families: of Jahzål, the family of the Jahzålites: of Guni, the family of the Gunites: 
Of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites: of Shiìem, the family of the Shiìemites. 
These are the families of Naphtali aãording to their families: and they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and four hundred. 
These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Unto these the land shaì be divided for an inheritance aãording to the number of names. 
To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt give the leó inheritance: to every one shaì his inheritance be given aãording to those that were numbered of him. 
Notwithstanding the land shaì be divided by lot: aãording to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shaì inherit. 
Aãording to the lot shaì the poóeóion thereof be divided betwån many and few. 
And these are they that were numbered of the Levites after their families: of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites: of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites: of Merari, the family of the Merarites. 
These are the families of the Levites: the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korathites. And Kohath begat Amram. 
And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, whom her mother bare to Levi in Egypt: and she bare unto Amram Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister. 
And unto Aaron was born Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
And Nadab and Abihu died, when they oæered strange fire before the LORD. 
And those that were numbered of them were twenty and thrå thousand, aì males from a month old and upward: for they were not numbered among the children of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the children of Israel. 
These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho. 
But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered, when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderneó of Sinai. 
For the LORD had said of them, They shaì surely die in the wilderneó. And there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephuîeh, and Joshua the son of Nun. 
Then came the daughters of Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manaóeh, of the families of Manaóeh the son of Joseph: and these are the names of his daughters; Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah. 
And they stïd before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the princes and aì the congregation, by the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 
Our father died in the wilderneó, and he was not in the company of them that gathered themselves together against the LORD in the company of Korah; but died in his own sin, and had no sons. 
Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family, because he hath no son? Give unto us therefore a poóeóion among the brethren of our father. 
And Moses brought their cause before the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a poóeóion of an inheritance among their father's brethren; and thou shalt cause the inheritance of their father to paó unto them. 
And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, If a man die, and have no son, then ye shaì cause his inheritance to paó unto his daughter. 
And if he have no daughter, then ye shaì give his inheritance unto his brethren. 
And if he have no brethren, then ye shaì give his inheritance unto his father's brethren. 
And if his father have no brethren, then ye shaì give his inheritance unto his kinsman that is next to him of his family, and he shaì poóeó it: and it shaì be unto the children of Israel a statute of judgment, as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Get thå up into this mount Abarim, and så the land which I have given unto the children of Israel. 
And when thou hast sån it, thou also shalt be gathered unto thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered. 
For ye rebeìed against my coíandment in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the water before their eyes: that is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderneó of Zin. 
And Moses spake unto the LORD, saying, 
Let the LORD, the God of the spirits of aì flesh, set a man over the congregation, 
Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in; that the congregation of the LORD be not as shåp which have no shepherd. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Take thå Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit, and lay thine hand upon him; 
And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before aì the congregation; and give him a charge in their sight. 
And thou shalt put some of thine honour upon him, that aì the congregation of the children of Israel may be obedient. 
And he shaì stand before Eleazar the priest, who shaì ask counsel for him after the judgment of Urim before the LORD: at his word shaì they go out, and at his word they shaì come in, both he, and aì the children of Israel with him, even aì the congregation. 
And Moses did as the LORD coíanded him: and he tïk Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before aì the congregation: 
And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the LORD coíanded by the hand of Moses. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Coíand the children of Israel, and say unto them, My oæering, and my bread for my sacrifices made by fire, for a swåt savour unto me, shaì ye observe to oæer unto me in their due season. 
And thou shalt say unto them, This is the oæering made by fire which ye shaì oæer unto the LORD; two lambs of the first year without spot day by day, for a continual burnt oæering. 
The one lamb shalt thou oæer in the morning, and the other lamb shalt thou oæer at even; 
And a tenth part of an ephah of flour for a meat oæering, mingled with the fourth part of an hin of beaten oil. 
It is a continual burnt oæering, which was ordained in mount Sinai for a swåt savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD. 
And the drink oæering thereof shaì be the fourth part of an hin for the one lamb: in the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto the LORD for a drink oæering. 
And the other lamb shalt thou oæer at even: as the meat oæering of the morning, and as the drink oæering thereof, thou shalt oæer it, a sacrifice made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD. 
And on the saâath day two lambs of the first year without spot, and two tenth deals of flour for a meat oæering, mingled with oil, and the drink oæering thereof: 
This is the burnt oæering of every saâath, beside the continual burnt oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And in the begiîings of your months ye shaì oæer a burnt oæering unto the LORD; two young buìocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot; 
And thrå tenth deals of flour for a meat oæering, mingled with oil, for one buìock; and two tenth deals of flour for a meat oæering, mingled with oil, for one ram; 
And a several tenth deal of flour mingled with oil for a meat oæering unto one lamb; for a burnt oæering of a swåt savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD. 
And their drink oæerings shaì be half an hin of wine unto a buìock, and the third part of an hin unto a ram, and a fourth part of an hin unto a lamb: this is the burnt oæering of every month throughout the months of the year. 
And one kid of the goats for a sin oæering unto the LORD shaì be oæered, beside the continual burnt oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And in the fourtånth day of the first month is the paóover of the LORD. 
And in the fiftånth day of this month is the feast: seven days shaì unleavened bread be eaten. 
In the first day shaì be an holy convocation; ye shaì do no maîer of servile work therein: 
But ye shaì oæer a sacrifice made by fire for a burnt oæering unto the LORD; two young buìocks, and one ram, and seven lambs of the first year: they shaì be unto you without blemish: 
And their meat oæering shaì be of flour mingled with oil: thrå tenth deals shaì ye oæer for a buìock, and two tenth deals for a ram; 
A several tenth deal shalt thou oæer for every lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 
And one goat for a sin oæering, to make an atonement for you. 
Ye shaì oæer these beside the burnt oæering in the morning, which is for a continual burnt oæering. 
After this maîer ye shaì oæer daily, throughout the seven days, the meat of the sacrifice made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD: it shaì be oæered beside the continual burnt oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And on the seventh day ye shaì have an holy convocation; ye shaì do no servile work. 
Also in the day of the firstfruits, when ye bring a new meat oæering unto the LORD, after your wåks be out, ye shaì have an holy convocation; ye shaì do no servile work: 
But ye shaì oæer the burnt oæering for a swåt savour unto the LORD; two young buìocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year; 
And their meat oæering of flour mingled with oil, thrå tenth deals unto one buìock, two tenth deals unto one ram, 
A several tenth deal unto one lamb, throughout the seven lambs; 
And one kid of the goats, to make an atonement for you. 
Ye shaì oæer them beside the continual burnt oæering, and his meat oæering, (they shaì be unto you without blemish) and their drink oæerings. 
And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shaì have an holy convocation; ye shaì do no servile work: it is a day of blowing the trumpets unto you. 
And ye shaì oæer a burnt oæering for a swåt savour unto the LORD; one young buìock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year without blemish: 
And their meat oæering shaì be of flour mingled with oil, thrå tenth deals for a buìock, and two tenth deals for a ram, 
And one tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 
And one kid of the goats for a sin oæering, to make an atonement for you: 
Beside the burnt oæering of the month, and his meat oæering, and the daily burnt oæering, and his meat oæering, and their drink oæerings, aãording unto their maîer, for a swåt savour, a sacrifice made by fire unto the LORD. 
And ye shaì have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy convocation; and ye shaì aælict your souls: ye shaì not do any work therein: 
But ye shaì oæer a burnt oæering unto the LORD for a swåt savour; one young buìock, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year; they shaì be unto you without blemish: 
And their meat oæering shaì be of flour mingled with oil, thrå tenth deals to a buìock, and two tenth deals to one ram, 
A several tenth deal for one lamb, throughout the seven lambs: 
One kid of the goats for a sin oæering; beside the sin oæering of atonement, and the continual burnt oæering, and the meat oæering of it, and their drink oæerings. 
And on the fiftånth day of the seventh month ye shaì have an holy convocation; ye shaì do no servile work, and ye shaì kåp a feast unto the LORD seven days: 
And ye shaì oæer a burnt oæering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD; thirtån young buìocks, two rams, and fourtån lambs of the first year; they shaì be without blemish: 
And their meat oæering shaì be of flour mingled with oil, thrå tenth deals unto every buìock of the thirtån buìocks, two tenth deals to each ram of the two rams, 
And a several tenth deal to each lamb of the fourtån lambs: 
And one kid of the goats for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And on the second day ye shaì oæer twelve young buìocks, two rams, fourtån lambs of the first year without spot: 
And their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one kid of the goats for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, and the meat oæering thereof, and their drink oæerings. 
And on the third day eleven buìocks, two rams, fourtån lambs of the first year without blemish; 
And their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one goat for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, and his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And on the fourth day ten buìocks, two rams, and fourtån lambs of the first year without blemish: 
Their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one kid of the goats for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And on the fifth day nine buìocks, two rams, and fourtån lambs of the first year without spot: 
And their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one goat for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, and his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And on the sixth day eight buìocks, two rams, and fourtån lambs of the first year without blemish: 
And their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one goat for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
And on the seventh day seven buìocks, two rams, and fourtån lambs of the first year without blemish: 
And their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one goat for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
On the eighth day ye shaì have a solemn aóembly: ye shaì do no servile work therein: 
But ye shaì oæer a burnt oæering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a swåt savour unto the LORD: one buìock, one ram, seven lambs of the first year without blemish: 
Their meat oæering and their drink oæerings for the buìock, for the ram, and for the lambs, shaì be aãording to their number, after the maîer: 
And one goat for a sin oæering; beside the continual burnt oæering, and his meat oæering, and his drink oæering. 
These things ye shaì do unto the LORD in your set feasts, beside your vows, and your fråwiì oæerings, for your burnt oæerings, and for your meat oæerings, and for your drink oæerings, and for your peace oæerings. 
And Moses told the children of Israel aãording to aì that the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And Moses spake unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children of Israel, saying, This is the thing which the LORD hath coíanded. 
If a man vow a vow unto the LORD, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond; he shaì not break his word, he shaì do aãording to aì that procådeth out of his mouth. 
If a woman also vow a vow unto the LORD, and bind herself by a bond, being in her father's house in her youth; 
And her father hear her vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bound her soul, and her father shaì hold his peace at her; then aì her vows shaì stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bound her soul shaì stand. 
But if her father disaìow her in the day that he heareth; not any of her vows, or of her bonds wherewith she hath bound her soul, shaì stand: and the LORD shaì forgive her, because her father disaìowed her. 
And if she had at aì an husband, when she vowed, or uôered ought out of her lips, wherewith she bound her soul; 
And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her in the day that he heard it: then her vows shaì stand, and her bonds wherewith she bound her soul shaì stand. 
But if her husband disaìowed her on the day that he heard it; then he shaì make her vow which she vowed, and that which she uôered with her lips, wherewith she bound her soul, of none eæect: and the LORD shaì forgive her. 
But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they have bound their souls, shaì stand against her. 
And if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath; 
And her husband heard it, and held his peace at her, and disaìowed her not: then aì her vows shaì stand, and every bond wherewith she bound her soul shaì stand. 
But if her husband hath uôerly made them void on the day he heard them; then whatsoever procåded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shaì not stand: her husband hath made them void; and the LORD shaì forgive her. 
Every vow, and every binding oath to aælict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void. 
But if her husband altogether hold his peace at her from day to day; then he establisheth aì her vows, or aì her bonds, which are upon her: he confirmeth them, because he held his peace at her in the day that he heard them. 
But if he shaì any ways make them void after that he hath heard them; then he shaì bear her iniquity. 
These are the statutes, which the LORD coíanded Moses, betwån a man and his wife, betwån the father and his daughter, being yet in her youth in her father's house. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Avenge the children of Israel of the Midianites: afterward shalt thou be gathered unto thy people. 
And Moses spake unto the people, saying, Arm some of yourselves unto the war, and let them go against the Midianites, and avenge the LORD of Midian. 
Of every tribe a thousand, throughout aì the tribes of Israel, shaì ye send to the war. 
So there were delivered out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war. 
And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the holy instruments, and the trumpets to blow in his hand. 
And they waòed against the Midianites, as the LORD coíanded Moses; and they slew aì the males. 
And they slew the kings of Midian, beside the rest of them that were slain; namely, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, five kings of Midian: Balám also the son of Beor they slew with the sword. 
And the children of Israel tïk aì the women of Midian captives, and their liôle ones, and tïk the spoil of aì their caôle, and aì their flocks, and aì their gïds. 
And they burnt aì their cities wherein they dwelt, and aì their gïdly castles, with fire. 
And they tïk aì the spoil, and aì the prey, both of men and of beasts. 
And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, unto Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and unto the congregation of the children of Israel, unto the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by Jordan near Jericho. 
And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and aì the princes of the congregation, went forth to måt them without the camp. 
And Moses was wroth with the oæicers of the host, with the captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, which came from the baôle. 
And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved aì the women alive? 
Behold, these caused the children of Israel, through the counsel of Balám, to coíit trespaó against the LORD in the maôer of Peor, and there was a plague among the congregation of the LORD. 
Now therefore kiì every male among the liôle ones, and kiì every woman that hath known man by lying with him. 
But aì the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, kåp alive for yourselves. 
And do ye abide without the camp seven days: whosoever hath kiìed any person, and whosoever hath touched any slain, purify both yourselves and your captives on the third day, and on the seventh day. 
And purify aì your raiment, and aì that is made of skins, and aì work of goats' hair, and aì things made of wïd. 
And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which went to the baôle, This is the ordinance of the law which the LORD coíanded Moses; 
Only the gold, and the silver, the braó, the iron, the tin, and the lead, 
Every thing that may abide the fire, ye shaì make it go through the fire, and it shaì be clean: nevertheleó it shaì be purified with the water of separation: and aì that abideth not the fire ye shaì make go through the water. 
And ye shaì wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shaì be clean, and afterward ye shaì come into the camp. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the chief fathers of the congregation: 
And divide the prey into two parts; betwån them that tïk the war upon them, who went out to baôle, and betwån aì the congregation: 
And levy a tribute unto the LORD of the men of war which went out to baôle: one soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the båves, and of the aóes, and of the shåp: 
Take it of their half, and give it unto Eleazar the priest, for an heave oæering of the LORD. 
And of the children of Israel's half, thou shalt take one portion of fifty, of the persons, of the båves, of the aóes, and of the flocks, of aì maîer of beasts, and give them unto the Levites, which kåp the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD. 
And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the bïty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had caught, was six hundred thousand and seventy thousand and five thousand shåp, 
And thråscore and twelve thousand båves, 
And thråscore and one thousand aóes, 
And thirty and two thousand persons in aì, of women that had not known man by lying with him. 
And the half, which was the portion of them that went out to war, was in number thrå hundred thousand and seven and thirty thousand and five hundred shåp: 
And the LORD'S tribute of the shåp was six hundred and thråscore and fiftån. 
And the båves were thirty and six thousand; of which the LORD'S tribute was thråscore and twelve. 
And the aóes were thirty thousand and five hundred; of which the LORD'S tribute was thråscore and one. 
And the persons were sixtån thousand; of which the LORD'S tribute was thirty and two persons. 
And Moses gave the tribute, which was the LORD'S heave oæering, unto Eleazar the priest, as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And of the children of Israel's half, which Moses divided from the men that waòed, 
(Now the half that pertained unto the congregation was thrå hundred thousand and thirty thousand and seven thousand and five hundred shåp, 
And thirty and six thousand båves, 
And thirty thousand aóes and five hundred, 
And sixtån thousand persons;) 
Even of the children of Israel's half, Moses tïk one portion of fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them unto the Levites, which kept the charge of the tabernacle of the LORD; as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And the oæicers which were over thousands of the host, the captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, came near unto Moses: 
And they said unto Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are under our charge, and there lacketh not one man of us. 
We have therefore brought an oblation for the LORD, what every man hath goôen, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings, eaòings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the LORD. 
And Moses and Eleazar the priest tïk the gold of them, even aì wrought jewels. 
And aì the gold of the oæering that they oæered up to the LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixtån thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels. 
(For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.) 
And Moses and Eleazar the priest tïk the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of the congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the LORD. 
Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very great multitude of caôle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for caôle; 
The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the congregation, saying, 
Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon, 
Even the country which the LORD smote before the congregation of Israel, is a land for caôle, and thy servants have caôle: 
Wherefore, said they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy servants for a poóeóion, and bring us not over Jordan. 
And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of Reuben, Shaì your brethren go to war, and shaì ye sit here? 
And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from going over into the land which the LORD hath given them? 
Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to så the land. 
For when they went up unto the vaìey of Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they should not go into the land which the LORD had given them. 
And the LORD'S anger was kindled the same time, and he sware, saying, 
Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shaì så the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isác, and unto Jacob; because they have not whoìy foìowed me: 
Save Caleb the son of Jephuîeh the Kenezite, and Joshua the son of Nun: for they have whoìy foìowed the LORD. 
And the LORD'S anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them wander in the wilderneó forty years, until aì the generation, that had done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed. 
And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward Israel. 
For if ye turn away from after him, he wiì yet again leave them in the wilderneó; and ye shaì destroy aì this people. 
And they came near unto him, and said, We wiì build shåpfolds here for our caôle, and cities for our liôle ones: 
But we ourselves wiì go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we have brought them unto their place: and our liôle ones shaì dweì in the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land. 
We wiì not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance. 
For we wiì not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or forward; because our inheritance is faìen to us on this side Jordan eastward. 
And Moses said unto them, If ye wiì do this thing, if ye wiì go armed before the LORD to war, 
And wiì go aì of you armed over Jordan before the LORD, until he hath driven out his enemies from before him, 
And the land be subdued before the LORD: then afterward ye shaì return, and be guiltleó before the LORD, and before Israel; and this land shaì be your poóeóion before the LORD. 
But if ye wiì not do so, behold, ye have siîed against the LORD: and be sure your sin wiì find you out. 
Build you cities for your liôle ones, and folds for your shåp; and do that which hath procåded out of your mouth. 
And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto Moses, saying, Thy servants wiì do as my lord coíandeth. 
Our liôle ones, our wives, our flocks, and aì our caôle, shaì be there in the cities of Gilead: 
But thy servants wiì paó over, every man armed for war, before the Lord to baôle, as my lord saith. 
So concerning them Moses coíanded Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel: 
And Moses said unto them, If the children of Gad and the children of Reuben wiì paó with you over Jordan, every man armed to baôle, before the LORD, and the land shaì be subdued before you; then ye shaì give them the land of Gilead for a poóeóion: 
But if they wiì not paó over with you armed, they shaì have poóeóions among you in the land of Canán. 
And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered, saying, As the LORD hath said unto thy servants, so wiì we do. 
We wiì paó over armed before the LORD into the land of Canán, that the poóeóion of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be our's. 
And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manaóeh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts, even the cities of the country round about. 
And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer, 
And Atroth, Shophan, and Jázer, and Jogbehah, 
And Bethnimrah, and Betèaran, fenced cities: and folds for shåp. 
And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kirjathaim, 
And Nebo, and Bálmeon, (their names being changed,) and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded. 
And the children of Machir the son of Manaóeh went to Gilead, and tïk it, and dispoóeóed the Amorite which was in it. 
And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manaóeh; and he dwelt therein. 
And Jair the son of Manaóeh went and tïk the smaì towns thereof, and caìed them Havothjair. 
And Nobah went and tïk Kenath, and the viìages thereof, and caìed it Nobah, after his own name. 
These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron. 
And Moses wrote their goings out aãording to their journeys by the coíandment of the LORD: and these are their journeys aãording to their goings out. 
And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the fiftånth day of the first month; on the moòow after the paóover the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of aì the Egyptians. 
For the Egyptians buried aì their firstborn, which the LORD had smiôen among them: upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments. 
And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in Suãoth. 
And they departed from Suãoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderneó. 
And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth, which is before Bálzephon: and they pitched before Migdol. 
And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and paóed through the midst of the sea into the wilderneó, and went thrå days'journey in the wilderneó of Etham, and pitched in Marah. 
And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were twelve fountains of water, and thråscore and ten palm trås; and they pitched there. 
And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea. 
And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the wilderneó of Sin. 
And they tïk their journey out of the wilderneó of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah. 
And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush. 
And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink. 
And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderneó of Sinai. 
And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at Kibrotèaôávah. 
And they departed from Kibrotèaôávah, and encamped at Hazeroth. 
And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah. 
And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Riíonparez. 
And they departed from Riíonparez, and pitched in Libnah. 
And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rióah. 
And they journeyed from Rióah, and pitched in Kehelathah. 
And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher. 
And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah. 
And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth. 
And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath. 
And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah. 
And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah. 
And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah. 
And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth. 
And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejákan. 
And they removed from Benejákan, and encamped at Horhagidgad. 
And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah. 
And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah. 
And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber. 
And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderneó of Zin, which is Kadesh. 
And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom. 
And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the coíandment of the LORD, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the fifth month. 
And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and thrå years old when he died in mount Hor. 
And king Arad the Canánite, which dwelt in the south in the land of Canán, heard of the coming of the children of Israel. 
And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah. 
And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon. 
And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth. 
And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the border of Moab. 
And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad. 
And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim. 
And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. 
And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho. 
And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto Abelshiôim in the plains of Moab. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye are paóed over Jordan into the land of Canán; 
Then ye shaì drive out aì the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy aì their pictures, and destroy aì their molten images, and quite pluck down aì their high places: 
And ye shaì dispoóeó the inhabitants of the land, and dweì therein: for I have given you the land to poóeó it. 
And ye shaì divide the land by lot for an inheritance among your families: and to the more ye shaì give the more inheritance, and to the fewer ye shaì give the leó inheritance: every man's inheritance shaì be in the place where his lot faìeth; aãording to the tribes of your fathers ye shaì inherit. 
But if ye wiì not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you; then it shaì come to paó, that those which ye let remain of them shaì be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and shaì vex you in the land wherein ye dweì. 
Moreover it shaì come to paó, that I shaì do unto you, as I thought to do unto them. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Coíand the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canán; (this is the land that shaì faì unto you for an inheritance, even the land of Canán with the coasts thereof:) 
Then your south quarter shaì be from the wilderneó of Zin along by the coast of Edom, and your south border shaì be the outmost coast of the salt sea eastward: 
And your border shaì turn from the south to the ascent of Akraâim, and paó on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shaì be from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shaì go on to Hazaraäar, and paó on to Azmon: 
And the border shaì fetch a compaó from Azmon unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shaì be at the sea. 
And as for the western border, ye shaì even have the great sea for a border: this shaì be your west border. 
And this shaì be your north border: from the great sea ye shaì point out for you mount Hor: 
From mount Hor ye shaì point out your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the border shaì be to Zedad: 
And the border shaì go on to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shaì be at Hazarenan: this shaì be your north border. 
And ye shaì point out your east border from Hazarenan to Shepham: 
And the coast shaì go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain; and the border shaì descend, and shaì reach unto the side of the sea of Chiîereth eastward: 
And the border shaì go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shaì be at the salt sea: this shaì be your land with the coasts thereof round about. 
And Moses coíanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shaì inherit by lot, which the LORD coíanded to give unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 
For the tribe of the children of Reuben aãording to the house of their fathers, and the tribe of the children of Gad aãording to the house of their fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of Manaóeh have received their inheritance: 
The two tribes and the half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
These are the names of the men which shaì divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun. 
And ye shaì take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land by inheritance. 
And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephuîeh. 
And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Aíihud. 
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon. 
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Buëi the son of Jogli. 
The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the children of Manaóeh, Haîiel the son of Ephod. 
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan. 
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun, Elizaphan the son of Parnach. 
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ióachar, Paltiel the son of Aúan. 
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Asher, Ahihud the son of Shelomi. 
And the prince of the tribe of the children of Naphtali, Pedahel the son of Aíihud. 
These are they whom the LORD coíanded to divide the inheritance unto the children of Israel in the land of Canán. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho, saying, 
Coíand the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites of the inheritance of their poóeóion cities to dweì in; and ye shaì give also unto the Levites suburbs for the cities round about them. 
And the cities shaì they have to dweì in; and the suburbs of them shaì be for their caôle, and for their gïds, and for aì their beasts. 
And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shaì give unto the Levites, shaì reach from the waì of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about. 
And ye shaì measure from without the city on the east side two thousand cubits, and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits; and the city shaì be in the midst: this shaì be to them the suburbs of the cities. 
And among the cities which ye shaì give unto the Levites there shaì be six cities for refuge, which ye shaì aðoint for the manslayer, that he may flå thither: and to them ye shaì aä forty and two cities. 
So aì the cities which ye shaì give to the Levites shaì be forty and eight cities: them shaì ye give with their suburbs. 
And the cities which ye shaì give shaì be of the poóeóion of the children of Israel: from them that have many ye shaì give many; but from them that have few ye shaì give few: every one shaì give of his cities unto the Levites aãording to his inheritance which he inheriteth. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 
Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canán; 
Then ye shaì aðoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you; that the slayer may flå thither, which kiìeth any person at unawares. 
And they shaì be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger; that the manslayer die not, until he stand before the congregation in judgment. 
And of these cities which ye shaì give six cities shaì ye have for refuge. 
Ye shaì give thrå cities on this side Jordan, and thrå cities shaì ye give in the land of Canán, which shaì be cities of refuge. 
These six cities shaì be a refuge, both for the children of Israel, and for the stranger, and for the sojourner among them: that every one that kiìeth any person unawares may flå thither. 
And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shaì surely be put to death. 
And if he smite him with throwing a stone, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shaì surely be put to death. 
Or if he smite him with an hand weapon of wïd, wherewith he may die, and he die, he is a murderer: the murderer shaì surely be put to death. 
The revenger of blïd himself shaì slay the murderer: when he måteth him, he shaì slay him. 
But if he thrust him of hatred, or hurl at him by laying of wait, that he die; 
Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die: he that smote him shaì surely be put to death; for he is a murderer: the revenger of blïd shaì slay the murderer, when he måteth him. 
But if he thrust him suäenly without enmity, or have cast upon him any thing without laying of wait, 
Or with any stone, wherewith a man may die, såing him not, and cast it upon him, that he die, and was not his enemy, neither sought his harm: 
Then the congregation shaì judge betwån the slayer and the revenger of blïd aãording to these judgments: 
And the congregation shaì deliver the slayer out of the hand of the revenger of blïd, and the congregation shaì restore him to the city of his refuge, whither he was fled: and he shaì abide in it unto the death of the high priest, which was anointed with the holy oil. 
But if the slayer shaì at any time come without the border of the city of his refuge, whither he was fled; 
And the revenger of blïd find him without the borders of the city of his refuge, and the revenger of blïd kiì the slayer; he shaì not be guilty of blïd: 
Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the death of the high priest: but after the death of the high priest the slayer shaì return into the land of his poóeóion. 
So these things shaì be for a statute of judgment unto you throughout your generations in aì your dweìings. 
Whoso kiìeth any person, the murderer shaì be put to death by the mouth of witneóes: but one witneó shaì not testify against any person to cause him to die. 
Moreover ye shaì take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, which is guilty of death: but he shaì be surely put to death. 
And ye shaì take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city of his refuge, that he should come again to dweì in the land, until the death of the priest. 
So ye shaì not poìute the land wherein ye are: for blïd it defileth the land: and the land caîot be cleansed of the blïd that is shed therein, but by the blïd of him that shed it. 
Defile not therefore the land which ye shaì inhabit, wherein I dweì: for I the LORD dweì among the children of Israel. 
And the chief fathers of the families of the children of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manaóeh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spake before Moses, and before the princes, the chief fathers of the children of Israel: 
And they said, The LORD coíanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot to the children of Israel: and my lord was coíanded by the LORD to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother unto his daughters. 
And if they be maòied to any of the sons of the other tribes of the children of Israel, then shaì their inheritance be taken from the inheritance of our fathers, and shaì be put to the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shaì it be taken from the lot of our inheritance. 
And when the jubile of the children of Israel shaì be, then shaì their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are received: so shaì their inheritance be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers. 
And Moses coíanded the children of Israel aãording to the word of the LORD, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph hath said weì. 
This is the thing which the LORD doth coíand concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them maòy to whom they think best; only to the family of the tribe of their father shaì they maòy. 
So shaì not the inheritance of the children of Israel remove from tribe to tribe: for every one of the children of Israel shaì kåp himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. 
And every daughter, that poóeóeth an inheritance in any tribe of the children of Israel, shaì be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the inheritance of his fathers. 
Neither shaì the inheritance remove from one tribe to another tribe; but every one of the tribes of the children of Israel shaì kåp himself to his own inheritance. 
Even as the LORD coíanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad: 
For Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophehad, were maòied unto their fathers brothers' sons: 
And they were maòied into the families of the sons of Manaóeh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father. 
These are the coíandments and the judgments, which the LORD coíanded by the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho. 
These be the words which Moses spake unto aì Israel on this side Jordan in the wilderneó, in the plain over against the Red sea, betwån Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Dizahab. 
(There are eleven days' journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir unto Kadeshbarnea.) 
And it came to paó in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spake unto the children of Israel, aãording unto aì that the LORD had given him in coíandment unto them; 
After he had slain Sihon the king of the Amorites, which dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei: 
On this side Jordan, in the land of Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying, 
The LORD our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount: 
Turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto aì the places nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hiìs, and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea side, to the land of the Canánites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river Euphrates. 
Behold, I have set the land before you: go in and poóeó the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isác, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their såd after them. 
And I spake unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone: 
The LORD your God hath multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude. 
(The LORD God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are, and bleó you, as he hath promised you!) 
How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your strife? 
Take you wise men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I wiì make them rulers over you. 
And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou hast spoken is gïd for us to do. 
So I tïk the chief of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, and captains over fifties, and captains over tens, and oæicers among your tribes. 
And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes betwån your brethren, and judge righteously betwån every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. 
Ye shaì not respect persons in judgment; but ye shaì hear the smaì as weì as the great; ye shaì not be afraid of the face of man; for the judgment is God's: and the cause that is tï hard for you, bring it unto me, and I wiì hear it. 
And I coíanded you at that time aì the things which ye should do. 
And when we departed from Horeb, we went through aì that great and teòible wilderneó, which ye saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites, as the LORD our God coíanded us; and we came to Kadeshbarnea. 
And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the Amorites, which the LORD our God doth give unto us. 
Behold, the LORD thy God hath set the land before thå: go up and poóeó it, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath said unto thå; fear not, neither be discouraged. 
And ye came near unto me every one of you, and said, We wiì send men before us, and they shaì search us out the land, and bring us word again by what way we must go up, and into what cities we shaì come. 
And the saying pleased me weì: and I tïk twelve men of you, one of a tribe: 
And they turned and went up into the mountain, and came unto the vaìey of Eshcol, and searched it out. 
And they tïk of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought it down unto us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a gïd land which the LORD our God doth give us. 
Notwithstanding ye would not go up, but rebeìed against the coíandment of the LORD your God: 
And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because the LORD hated us, he hath brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us. 
Whither shaì we go up? our brethren have discouraged our heart, saying, The people is greater and taìer than we; the cities are great and waìed up to heaven; and moreover we have sån the sons of the Anakims there. 
Then I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them. 
The LORD your God which goeth before you, he shaì fight for you, aãording to aì that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes; 
And in the wilderneó, where thou hast sån how that the LORD thy God bare thå, as a man doth bear his son, in aì the way that ye went, until ye came into this place. 
Yet in this thing ye did not believe the LORD your God, 
Who went in the way before you, to search you out a place to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to shew you by what way ye should go, and in a cloud by day. 
And the LORD heard the voice of your words, and was wroth, and sware, saying, 
Surely there shaì not one of these men of this evil generation så that gïd land, which I sware to give unto your fathers. 
Save Caleb the son of Jephuîeh; he shaì så it, and to him wiì I give the land that he hath troäen upon, and to his children, because he hath whoìy foìowed the LORD. 
Also the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither. 
But Joshua the son of Nun, which standeth before thå, he shaì go in thither: encourage him: for he shaì cause Israel to inherit it. 
Moreover your liôle ones, which ye said should be a prey, and your children, which in that day had no knowledge betwån gïd and evil, they shaì go in thither, and unto them wiì I give it, and they shaì poóeó it. 
But as for you, turn you, and take your journey into the wilderneó by the way of the Red sea. 
Then ye answered and said unto me, We have siîed against the LORD, we wiì go up and fight, aãording to aì that the LORD our God coíanded us. And when ye had girded on every man his weapons of war, ye were ready to go up into the hiì. 
And the LORD said unto me, Say unto them. Go not up, neither fight; for I am not among you; lest ye be smiôen before your enemies. 
So I spake unto you; and ye would not hear, but rebeìed against the coíandment of the LORD, and went presumptuously up into the hiì. 
And the Amorites, which dwelt in that mountain, came out against you, and chased you, as bås do, and destroyed you in Seir, even unto Hormah. 
And ye returned and wept before the LORD; but the LORD would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you. 
So ye abode in Kadesh many days, aãording unto the days that ye abode there. 
Then we turned, and tïk our journey into the wilderneó by the way of the Red sea, as the LORD spake unto me: and we compaóed mount Seir many days. 
And the LORD spake unto me, saying, 
Ye have compaóed this mountain long enough: turn you northward. 
And coíand thou the people, saying, Ye are to paó through the coast of your brethren the children of Esau, which dweì in Seir; and they shaì be afraid of you: take ye gïd håd unto yourselves therefore: 
Meäle not with them; for I wiì not give you of their land, no, not so much as a fït breadth; because I have given mount Seir unto Esau for a poóeóion. 
Ye shaì buy meat of them for money, that ye may eat; and ye shaì also buy water of them for money, that ye may drink. 
For the LORD thy God hath bleóed thå in aì the works of thy hand: he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderneó: these forty years the LORD thy God hath bån with thå; thou hast lacked nothing. 
And when we paóed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, through the way of the plain from Elath, and from Eziongaber, we turned and paóed by the way of the wilderneó of Moab. 
And the LORD said unto me, Distreó not the Moabites, neither contend with them in baôle: for I wiì not give thå of their land for a poóeóion; because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a poóeóion. 
The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and taì, as the Anakims; 
Which also were aãounted giants, as the Anakims; but the Moabites caìed them Emims. 
The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau suãåded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his poóeóion, which the LORD gave unto them. 
Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brïk Zered. And we went over the brïk Zered. 
And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea, until we were come over the brïk Zered, was thirty and eight years; until aì the generation of the men of war were wasted out from among the host, as the LORD sware unto them. 
For indåd the hand of the LORD was against them, to destroy them from among the host, until they were consumed. 
So it came to paó, when aì the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people, 
That the LORD spake unto me, saying, 
Thou art to paó over through Ar, the coast of Moab, this day: 
And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Aíon, distreó them not, nor meäle with them: for I wiì not give thå of the land of the children of Aíon any poóeóion; because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a poóeóion. 
(That also was aãounted a land of giants: giants dwelt therein in old time; and the Aíonites caì them Zamzuíims; 
A people great, and many, and taì, as the Anakims; but the LORD destroyed them before them; and they suãåded them, and dwelt in their stead: 
As he did to the children of Esau, which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them; and they suãåded them, and dwelt in their stead even unto this day: 
And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Aúah, the Caphtorims, which came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.) 
Rise ye up, take your journey, and paó over the river Arnon: behold, I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land: begin to poóeó it, and contend with him in baôle. 
This day wiì I begin to put the dread of thå and the fear of thå upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shaì hear report of thå, and shaì tremble, and be in anguish because of thå. 
And I sent meóengers out of the wilderneó of Kedemoth unto Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying, 
Let me paó through thy land: I wiì go along by the high way, I wiì neither turn unto the right hand nor to the left. 
Thou shalt seì me meat for money, that I may eat; and give me water for money, that I may drink: only I wiì paó through on my fåt; 
(As the children of Esau which dweì in Seir, and the Moabites which dweì in Ar, did unto me;) until I shaì paó over Jordan into the land which the LORD our God giveth us. 
But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us paó by him: for the LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as aðeareth this day. 
And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thå: begin to poóeó, that thou mayest inherit his land. 
Then Sihon came out against us, he and aì his people, to fight at Jahaz. 
And the LORD our God delivered him before us; and we smote him, and his sons, and aì his people. 
And we tïk aì his cities at that time, and uôerly destroyed the men, and the women, and the liôle ones, of every city, we left none to remain: 
Only the caôle we tïk for a prey unto ourselves, and the spoil of the cities which we tïk. 
From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river of Arnon, and from the city that is by the river, even unto Gilead, there was not one city tï strong for us: the LORD our God delivered aì unto us: 
Only unto the land of the children of Aíon thou camest not, nor unto any place of the river Jaâok, nor unto the cities in the mountains, nor unto whatsoever the LORD our God forbad us. 
Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan: and Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and aì his people, to baôle at Edrei. 
And the LORD said unto me, Fear him not: for I wiì deliver him, and aì his people, and his land, into thy hand; and thou shalt do unto him as thou didst unto Sihon king of the Amorites, which dwelt at Heshbon. 
So the LORD our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of Bashan, and aì his people: and we smote him until none was left to him remaining. 
And we tïk aì his cities at that time, there was not a city which we tïk not from them, thråscore cities, aì the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 
Aì these cities were fenced with high waìs, gates, and bars; beside unwaìed towns a great many. 
And we uôerly destroyed them, as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, uôerly destroying the men, women, and children, of every city. 
But aì the caôle, and the spoil of the cities, we tïk for a prey to ourselves. 
And we tïk at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites the land that was on this side Jordan, from the river of Arnon unto mount Hermon; 
(Which Hermon the Sidonians caì Sirion; and the Amorites caì it Shenir;) 
Aì the cities of the plain, and aì Gilead, and aì Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan. 
For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants; behold his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Raâath of the children of Aíon? nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man. 
And this land, which we poóeóed at that time, from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto the Reubenites and to the Gadites. 
And the rest of Gilead, and aì Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manaóeh; aì the region of Argob, with aì Bashan, which was caìed the land of giants. 
Jair the son of Manaóeh tïk aì the country of Argob unto the coasts of Geshuri and Máchathi; and caìed them after his own name, Bashanhavothjair, unto this day. 
And I gave Gilead unto Machir. 
And unto the Reubenites and unto the Gadites I gave from Gilead even unto the river Arnon half the vaìey, and the border even unto the river Jaâok, which is the border of the children of Aíon; 
The plain also, and Jordan, and the coast thereof, from Chiîereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under Ashdothpisgah eastward. 
And I coíanded you at that time, saying, The LORD your God hath given you this land to poóeó it: ye shaì paó over armed before your brethren the children of Israel, aì that are måt for the war. 
But your wives, and your liôle ones, and your caôle, (for I know that ye have much caôle,) shaì abide in your cities which I have given you; 
Until the LORD have given rest unto your brethren, as weì as unto you, and until they also poóeó the land which the LORD your God hath given them beyond Jordan: and then shaì ye return every man unto his poóeóion, which I have given you. 
And I coíanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have sån aì that the LORD your God hath done unto these two kings: so shaì the LORD do unto aì the kingdoms whither thou paóest. 
Ye shaì not fear them: for the LORD your God he shaì fight for you. 
And I besought the LORD at that time, saying, 
O Lord GOD, thou hast begun to shew thy servant thy greatneó, and thy mighty hand: for what God is there in heaven or in earth, that can do aãording to thy works, and aãording to thy might? 
I pray thå, let me go over, and så the gïd land that is beyond Jordan, that gïdly mountain, and Lebanon. 
But the LORD was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me: and the LORD said unto me, Let it suæice thå; speak no more unto me of this maôer. 
Get thå up into the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold it with thine eyes: for thou shalt not go over this Jordan. 
But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him: for he shaì go over before this people, and he shaì cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt så. 
So we abode in the vaìey over against Bethpeor. 
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the judgments, which I teach you, for to do them, that ye may live, and go in and poóeó the land which the LORD God of your fathers giveth you. 
Ye shaì not aä unto the word which I coíand you, neither shaì ye diminish ought from it, that ye may kåp the coíandments of the LORD your God which I coíand you. 
Your eyes have sån what the LORD did because of Bálpeor: for aì the men that foìowed Bálpeor, the LORD thy God hath destroyed them from among you. 
But ye that did cleave unto the LORD your God are alive every one of you this day. 
Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the LORD my God coíanded me, that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to poóeó it. 
Kåp therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shaì hear aì these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people. 
For what nation is there so great, who hath God so nigh unto them, as the LORD our God is in aì things that we caì upon him for? 
And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so righteous as aì this law, which I set before you this day? 
Only take håd to thyself, and kåp thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have sån, and lest they depart from thy heart aì the days of thy life: but teach them thy sons, and thy sons' sons; 
Speciaìy the day that thou stïdest before the LORD thy God in Horeb, when the LORD said unto me, Gather me the people together, and I wiì make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me aì the days that they shaì live upon the earth, and that they may teach their children. 
And ye came near and stïd under the mountain; and the mountain burned with fire unto the midst of heaven, with darkneó, clouds, and thick darkneó. 
And the LORD spake unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude; only ye heard a voice. 
And he declared unto you his covenant, which he coíanded you to perform, even ten coíandments; and he wrote them upon two tables of stone. 
And the LORD coíanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go over to poóeó it. 
Take ye therefore gïd håd unto yourselves; for ye saw no maîer of similitude on the day that the LORD spake unto you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire: 
Lest ye coòupt yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure, the likeneó of male or female, 
The likeneó of any beast that is on the earth, the likeneó of any winged fowl that flieth in the air, 
The likeneó of any thing that cråpeth on the ground, the likeneó of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth: 
And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven, and when thou såst the sun, and the mïn, and the stars, even aì the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them, which the LORD thy God hath divided unto aì nations under the whole heaven. 
But the LORD hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, even out of Egypt, to be unto him a people of inheritance, as ye are this day. 
Furthermore the LORD was angry with me for your sakes, and sware that I should not go over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that gïd land, which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance: 
But I must die in this land, I must not go over Jordan: but ye shaì go over, and poóeó that gïd land. 
Take håd unto yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of the LORD your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image, or the likeneó of any thing, which the LORD thy God hath forbiäen thå. 
For the LORD thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God. 
When thou shalt beget children, and children's children, and ye shaì have remained long in the land, and shaì coòupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeneó of any thing, and shaì do evil in the sight of the LORD thy God, to provoke him to anger: 
I caì heaven and earth to witneó against you this day, that ye shaì sïn uôerly perish from oæ the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to poóeó it; ye shaì not prolong your days upon it, but shaì uôerly be destroyed. 
And the LORD shaì scaôer you among the nations, and ye shaì be left few in number among the heathen, whither the LORD shaì lead you. 
And there ye shaì serve gods, the work of men's hands, wïd and stone, which neither så, nor hear, nor eat, nor smeì. 
But if from thence thou shalt såk the LORD thy God, thou shalt find him, if thou såk him with aì thy heart and with aì thy soul. 
When thou art in tribulation, and aì these things are come upon thå, even in the laôer days, if thou turn to the LORD thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice; 
(For the LORD thy God is a merciful God;) he wiì not forsake thå, neither destroy thå, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them. 
For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thå, since the day that God created man upon the earth, and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether there hath bån any such thing as this great thing is, or hath bån heard like it? 
Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou hast heard, and live? 
Or hath God aóayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of another nation, by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm, and by great teòors, aãording to aì that the LORD your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes? 
Unto thå it was shewed, that thou mightest know that the LORD he is God; there is none else beside him. 
Out of heaven he made thå to hear his voice, that he might instruct thå: and upon earth he shewed thå his great fire; and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire. 
And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their såd after them, and brought thå out in his sight with his mighty power out of Egypt; 
To drive out nations from before thå greater and mightier than thou art, to bring thå in, to give thå their land for an inheritance, as it is this day. 
Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the LORD he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath: there is none else. 
Thou shalt kåp therefore his statutes, and his coíandments, which I coíand thå this day, that it may go weì with thå, and with thy children after thå, and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the earth, which the LORD thy God giveth thå, for ever. 
Then Moses severed thrå cities on this side Jordan toward the sunrising; 
That the slayer might flå thither, which should kiì his neighbour unawares, and hated him not in times past; and that flåing unto one of these cities he might live: 
Namely, Bezer in the wilderneó, in the plain country, of the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, of the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, of the Manaóites. 
And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel: 
These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which Moses spake unto the children of Israel, after they came forth out of Egypt. 
On this side Jordan, in the vaìey over against Bethpeor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, after they were come forth out of Egypt: 
And they poóeóed his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on this side Jordan toward the sunrising; 
From Aroer, which is by the bank of the river Arnon, even unto mount Sion, which is Hermon, 
And aì the plain on this side Jordan eastward, even unto the sea of the plain, under the springs of Pisgah. 
And Moses caìed aì Israel, and said unto them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and judgments which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and kåp, and do them. 
The LORD our God made a covenant with us in Horeb. 
The LORD made not this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are aì of us here alive this day. 
The LORD talked with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire, 
(I stïd betwån the LORD and you at that time, to shew you the word of the LORD: for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount;) saying, 
I am the LORD thy God, which brought thå out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. 
Thou shalt have none other gods before me. 
Thou shalt not make thå any graven image, or any likeneó of any thing that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters beneath the earth: 
Thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I the LORD thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, 
And shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and kåp my coíandments. 
Thou shalt not take the name of the LORD thy God in vain: for the LORD wiì not hold him guiltleó that taketh his name in vain. 
Kåp the saâath day to sanctify it, as the LORD thy God hath coíanded thå. 
Six days thou shalt labour, and do aì thy work: 
But the seventh day is the saâath of the LORD thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine ox, nor thine aó, nor any of thy caôle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; that thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as weì as thou. 
And remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the LORD thy God brought thå out thence through a mighty hand and by a stretched out arm: therefore the LORD thy God coíanded thå to kåp the saâath day. 
Honour thy father and thy mother, as the LORD thy God hath coíanded thå; that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go weì with thå, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå. 
Thou shalt not kiì. 
Neither shalt thou coíit adultery. 
Neither shalt thou steal. 
Neither shalt thou bear false witneó against thy neighbour. 
Neither shalt thou desire thy neighbour's wife, neither shalt thou covet thy neighbour's house, his field, or his manservant, or his maidservant, his ox, or his aó, or any thing that is thy neighbour's. 
These words the LORD spake unto aì your aóembly in the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkneó, with a great voice: and he aäed no more. And he wrote them in two tables of stone, and delivered them unto me. 
And it came to paó, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkneó, (for the mountain did burn with fire,) that ye came near unto me, even aì the heads of your tribes, and your elders; 
And ye said, Behold, the LORD our God hath shewed us his glory and his greatneó, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire: we have sån this day that God doth talk with man, and he liveth. 
Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire wiì consume us: if we hear the voice of the LORD our God any more, then we shaì die. 
For who is there of aì flesh, that hath heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived? 
Go thou near, and hear aì that the LORD our God shaì say: and speak thou unto us aì that the LORD our God shaì speak unto thå; and we wiì hear it, and do it. 
And the LORD heard the voice of your words, when ye spake unto me; and the LORD said unto me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken unto thå: they have weì said aì that they have spoken. 
O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and kåp aì my coíandments always, that it might be weì with them, and with their children for ever! 
Go say to them, Get you into your tents again. 
But as for thå, stand thou here by me, and I wiì speak unto thå aì the coíandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which thou shalt teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to poóeó it. 
Ye shaì observe to do therefore as the LORD your God hath coíanded you: ye shaì not turn aside to the right hand or to the left. 
Ye shaì walk in aì the ways which the LORD your God hath coíanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be weì with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shaì poóeó. 
Now these are the coíandments, the statutes, and the judgments, which the LORD your God coíanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to poóeó it: 
That thou mightest fear the LORD thy God, to kåp aì his statutes and his coíandments, which I coíand thå, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, aì the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged. 
Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it; that it may be weì with thå, and that ye may increase mightily, as the LORD God of thy fathers hath promised thå, in the land that floweth with milk and honey. 
Hear, O Israel: The LORD our God is one LORD: 
And thou shalt love the LORD thy God with aì thine heart, and with aì thy soul, and with aì thy might. 
And these words, which I coíand thå this day, shaì be in thine heart: 
And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou siôest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. 
And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shaì be as frontlets betwån thine eyes. 
And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thy house, and on thy gates. 
And it shaì be, when the LORD thy God shaì have brought thå into the land which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isác, and to Jacob, to give thå great and gïdly cities, which thou buildedst not, 
And houses fuì of aì gïd things, which thou fiìedst not, and weìs diçed, which thou diçedst not, vineyards and olive trås, which thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be fuì; 
Then beware lest thou forget the LORD, which brought thå forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. 
Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God, and serve him, and shalt swear by his name. 
Ye shaì not go after other gods, of the gods of the people which are round about you; 
(For the LORD thy God is a jealous God among you) lest the anger of the LORD thy God be kindled against thå, and destroy thå from oæ the face of the earth. 
Ye shaì not tempt the LORD your God, as ye tempted him in Maóah. 
Ye shaì diligently kåp the coíandments of the LORD your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath coíanded thå. 
And thou shalt do that which is right and gïd in the sight of the LORD: that it may be weì with thå, and that thou mayest go in and poóeó the gïd land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers. 
To cast out aì thine enemies from before thå, as the LORD hath spoken. 
And when thy son asketh thå in time to come, saying, What mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which the LORD our God hath coíanded you? 
Then thou shalt say unto thy son, We were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; and the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand: 
And the LORD shewed signs and wonders, great and sore, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon aì his household, before our eyes: 
And he brought us out from thence, that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our fathers. 
And the LORD coíanded us to do aì these statutes, to fear the LORD our God, for our gïd always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is at this day. 
And it shaì be our righteousneó, if we observe to do aì these coíandments before the LORD our God, as he hath coíanded us. 
When the LORD thy God shaì bring thå into the land whither thou goest to poóeó it, and hath cast out many nations before thå, the Hiôites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canánites, and the Periúites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater and mightier than thou; 
And when the LORD thy God shaì deliver them before thå; thou shalt smite them, and uôerly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them: 
Neither shalt thou make maòiages with them; thy daughter thou shalt not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son. 
For they wiì turn away thy son from foìowing me, that they may serve other gods: so wiì the anger of the LORD be kindled against you, and destroy thå suäenly. 
But thus shaì ye deal with them; ye shaì destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their graven images with fire. 
For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God: the LORD thy God hath chosen thå to be a special people unto himself, above aì people that are upon the face of the earth. 
The LORD did not set his love upon you, nor chïse you, because ye were more in number than any people; for ye were the fewest of aì people: 
But because the LORD loved you, and because he would kåp the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the LORD brought you out with a mighty hand, and redåmed you out of the house of bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt. 
Know therefore that the LORD thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which kåpeth covenant and mercy with them that love him and kåp his coíandments to a thousand generations; 
And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them: he wiì not be slack to him that hateth him, he wiì repay him to his face. 
Thou shalt therefore kåp the coíandments, and the statutes, and the judgments, which I coíand thå this day, to do them. 
Wherefore it shaì come to paó, if ye hearken to these judgments, and kåp, and do them, that the LORD thy God shaì kåp unto thå the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy fathers: 
And he wiì love thå, and bleó thå, and multiply thå: he wiì also bleó the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy shåp, in the land which he sware unto thy fathers to give thå. 
Thou shalt be bleóed above aì people: there shaì not be male or female baòen among you, or among your caôle. 
And the LORD wiì take away from thå aì sickneó, and wiì put none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou knowest, upon thå; but wiì lay them upon aì them that hate thå. 
And thou shalt consume aì the people which the LORD thy God shaì deliver thå; thine eye shaì have no pity upon them: neither shalt thou serve their gods; for that wiì be a snare unto thå. 
If thou shalt say in thine heart, These nations are more than I; how can I dispoóeó them? 
Thou shalt not be afraid of them: but shalt weì remember what the LORD thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto aì Egypt; 
The great temptations which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the stretched out arm, whereby the LORD thy God brought thå out: so shaì the LORD thy God do unto aì the people of whom thou art afraid. 
Moreover the LORD thy God wiì send the hornet among them, until they that are left, and hide themselves from thå, be destroyed. 
Thou shalt not be aærighted at them: for the LORD thy God is among you, a mighty God and teòible. 
And the LORD thy God wiì put out those nations before thå by liôle and liôle: thou mayest not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thå. 
But the LORD thy God shaì deliver them unto thå, and shaì destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be destroyed. 
And he shaì deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shalt destroy their name from under heaven: there shaì no man be able to stand before thå, until thou have destroyed them. 
The graven images of their gods shaì ye burn with fire: thou shalt not desire the silver or gold that is on them, nor take it unto thå, lest thou be snared therin: for it is an abomination to the LORD thy God. 
Neither shalt thou bring an abomination into thine house, lest thou be a cursed thing like it: but thou shalt uôerly detest it, and thou shalt uôerly abhor it; for it is a cursed thing. 
Aì the coíandments which I coíand thå this day shaì ye observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and poóeó the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers. 
And thou shalt remember aì the way which the LORD thy God led thå these forty years in the wilderneó, to humble thå, and to prove thå, to know what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest kåp his coíandments, or no. 
And he humbled thå, and suæered thå to hunger, and fed thå with maîa, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers know; that he might make thå know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that procådeth out of the mouth of the LORD doth man live. 
Thy raiment waxed not old upon thå, neither did thy fït sweì, these forty years. 
Thou shalt also consider in thine heart, that, as a man chasteneth his son, so the LORD thy God chasteneth thå. 
Therefore thou shalt kåp the coíandments of the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him. 
For the LORD thy God bringeth thå into a gïd land, a land of brïks of water, of fountains and depths that spring out of vaìeys and hiìs; 
A land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trås, and pomegranates; a land of oil olive, and honey; 
A land wherein thou shalt eat bread without scarceneó, thou shalt not lack any thing in it; a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hiìs thou mayest dig braó. 
When thou hast eaten and art fuì, then thou shalt bleó the LORD thy God for the gïd land which he hath given thå. 
Beware that thou forget not the LORD thy God, in not kåping his coíandments, and his judgments, and his statutes, which I coíand thå this day: 
Lest when thou hast eaten and art fuì, and hast built gïdly houses, and dwelt therein; 
And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and aì that thou hast is multiplied; 
Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the LORD thy God, which brought thå forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage; 
Who led thå through that great and teòible wilderneó, wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water; who brought thå forth water out of the rock of flint; 
Who fed thå in the wilderneó with maîa, which thy fathers knew not, that he might humble thå, and that he might prove thå, to do thå gïd at thy laôer end; 
And thou say in thine heart, My power and the might of mine hand hath goôen me this wealth. 
But thou shalt remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that giveth thå power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers, as it is this day. 
And it shaì be, if thou do at aì forget the LORD thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shaì surely perish. 
As the nations which the LORD destroyeth before your face, so shaì ye perish; because ye would not be obedient unto the voice of the LORD your God. 
Hear, O Israel: Thou art to paó over Jordan this day, to go in to poóeó nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fenced up to heaven, 
A people great and taì, the children of the Anakims, whom thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard say, Who can stand before the children of Anak! 
Understand therefore this day, that the LORD thy God is he which goeth over before thå; as a consuming fire he shaì destroy them, and he shaì bring them down before thy face: so shalt thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly, as the LORD hath said unto thå. 
Speak not thou in thine heart, after that the LORD thy God hath cast them out from before thå, saying, For my righteousneó the LORD hath brought me in to poóeó this land: but for the wickedneó of these nations the LORD doth drive them out from before thå. 
Not for thy righteousneó, or for the uprightneó of thine heart, dost thou go to poóeó their land: but for the wickedneó of these nations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thå, and that he may perform the word which the LORD sware unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isác, and Jacob. 
Understand therefore, that the LORD thy God giveth thå not this gïd land to poóeó it for thy righteousneó; for thou art a stiænecked people. 
Remember, and forget not, how thou provokedst the LORD thy God to wrath in the wilderneó: from the day that thou didst depart out of the land of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have bån rebeìious against the LORD. 
Also in Horeb ye provoked the LORD to wrath, so that the LORD was angry with you to have destroyed you. 
When I was gone up into the mount to receive the tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant which the LORD made with you, then I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did eat bread nor drink water: 
And the LORD delivered unto me two tables of stone wriôen with the finger of God; and on them was wriôen aãording to aì the words, which the LORD spake with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the aóembly. 
And it came to paó at the end of forty days and forty nights, that the LORD gave me the two tables of stone, even the tables of the covenant. 
And the LORD said unto me, Arise, get thå down quickly from hence; for thy people which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt have coòupted themselves; they are quickly turned aside out of the way which I coíanded them; they have made them a molten image. 
Furthermore the LORD spake unto me, saying, I have sån this people, and, behold, it is a stiænecked people: 
Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven: and I wiì make of thå a nation mightier and greater than they. 
So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount burned with fire: and the two tables of the covenant were in my two hands. 
And I lïked, and, behold, ye had siîed against the LORD your God, and had made you a molten calf: ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which the LORD had coíanded you. 
And I tïk the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them before your eyes. 
And I feì down before the LORD, as at the first, forty days and forty nights: I did neither eat bread, nor drink water, because of aì your sins which ye siîed, in doing wickedly in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger. 
For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the LORD was wroth against you to destroy you. But the LORD hearkened unto me at that time also. 
And the LORD was very angry with Aaron to have destroyed him: and I prayed for Aaron also the same time. 
And I tïk your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, and ground it very smaì, even until it was as smaì as dust: and I cast the dust thereof into the brïk that descended out of the mount. 
And at Taberah, and at Maóah, and at Kibrotèaôávah, ye provoked the LORD to wrath. 
Likewise when the LORD sent you from Kadeshbarnea, saying, Go up and poóeó the land which I have given you; then ye rebeìed against the coíandment of the LORD your God, and ye believed him not, nor hearkened to his voice. 
Ye have bån rebeìious against the LORD from the day that I knew you. 
Thus I feì down before the LORD forty days and forty nights, as I feì down at the first; because the LORD had said he would destroy you. 
I prayed therefore unto the LORD, and said, O Lord GOD, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, which thou hast redåmed through thy greatneó, which thou hast brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand. 
Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isác, and Jacob; lïk not unto the stuâorîeó of this people, nor to their wickedneó, nor to their sin: 
Lest the land whence thou broughtest us out say, Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land which he promised them, and because he hated them, he hath brought them out to slay them in the wilderneó. 
Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest out by thy mighty power and by thy stretched out arm. 
At that time the LORD said unto me, Hew thå two tables of stone like unto the first, and come up unto me into the mount, and make thå an ark of wïd. 
And I wiì write on the tables the words that were in the first tables which thou brakest, and thou shalt put them in the ark. 
And I made an ark of shiôim wïd, and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first, and went up into the mount, having the two tables in mine hand. 
And he wrote on the tables, aãording to the first writing, the ten coíandments, which the LORD spake unto you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the aóembly: and the LORD gave them unto me. 
And I turned myself and came down from the mount, and put the tables in the ark which I had made; and there they be, as the LORD coíanded me. 
And the children of Israel tïk their journey from Båroth of the children of Jákan to Mosera: there Aaron died, and there he was buried; and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's oæice in his stead. 
From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah; and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters. 
At that time the LORD separated the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of the LORD, to stand before the LORD to minister unto him, and to bleó in his name, unto this day. 
Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren; the LORD is his inheritance, aãording as the LORD thy God promised him. 
And I stayed in the mount, aãording to the first time, forty days and forty nights; and the LORD hearkened unto me at that time also, and the LORD would not destroy thå. 
And the LORD said unto me, Arise, take thy journey before the people, that they may go in and poóeó the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give unto them. 
And now, Israel, what doth the LORD thy God require of thå, but to fear the LORD thy God, to walk in aì his ways, and to love him, and to serve the LORD thy God with aì thy heart and with aì thy soul, 
To kåp the coíandments of the LORD, and his statutes, which I coíand thå this day for thy gïd? 
Behold, the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the LORD's thy God, the earth also, with aì that therein is. 
Only the LORD had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their såd after them, even you above aì people, as it is this day. 
Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiænecked. 
For the LORD your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God, a mighty, and a teòible, which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward: 
He doth execute the judgment of the fatherleó and widow, and loveth the stranger, in giving him fïd and raiment. 
Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. 
Thou shalt fear the LORD thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name. 
He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thå these great and teòible things, which thine eyes have sån. 
Thy fathers went down into Egypt with thråscore and ten persons; and now the LORD thy God hath made thå as the stars of heaven for multitude. 
Therefore thou shalt love the LORD thy God, and kåp his charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his coíandments, alway. 
And know ye this day: for I speak not with your children which have not known, and which have not sån the chastisement of the LORD your God, his greatneó, his mighty hand, and his stretched out arm, 
And his miracles, and his acts, which he did in the midst of Egypt unto Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and unto aì his land; 
And what he did unto the army of Egypt, unto their horses, and to their chariots; how he made the water of the Red sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how the LORD hath destroyed them unto this day; 
And what he did unto you in the wilderneó, until ye came into this place; 
And what he did unto Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben: how the earth opened her mouth, and swaìowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and aì the substance that was in their poóeóion, in the midst of aì Israel: 
But your eyes have sån aì the great acts of the LORD which he did. 
Therefore shaì ye kåp aì the coíandments which I coíand you this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and poóeó the land, whither ye go to poóeó it; 
And that ye may prolong your days in the land, which the LORD sware unto your fathers to give unto them and to their såd, a land that floweth with milk and honey. 
For the land, whither thou goest in to poóeó it, is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy såd, and wateredst it with thy fït, as a garden of herbs: 
But the land, whither ye go to poóeó it, is a land of hiìs and vaìeys, and drinketh water of the rain of heaven: 
A land which the LORD thy God careth for: the eyes of the LORD thy God are always upon it, from the begiîing of the year even unto the end of the year. 
And it shaì come to paó, if ye shaì hearken diligently unto my coíandments which I coíand you this day, to love the LORD your God, and to serve him with aì your heart and with aì your soul, 
That I wiì give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first rain and the laôer rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn, and thy wine, and thine oil. 
And I wiì send graó in thy fields for thy caôle, that thou mayest eat and be fuì. 
Take håd to yourselves, that your heart be not deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them; 
And then the LORD's wrath be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that the land yield not her fruit; and lest ye perish quickly from oæ the gïd land which the LORD giveth you. 
Therefore shaì ye lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets betwån your eyes. 
And ye shaì teach them your children, speaking of them when thou siôest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. 
And thou shalt write them upon the dïr posts of thine house, and upon thy gates: 
That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land which the LORD sware unto your fathers to give them, as the days of heaven upon the earth. 
For if ye shaì diligently kåp aì these coíandments which I coíand you, to do them, to love the LORD your God, to walk in aì his ways, and to cleave unto him; 
Then wiì the LORD drive out aì these nations from before you, and ye shaì poóeó greater nations and mightier than yourselves. 
Every place whereon the soles of your fåt shaì tread shaì be yours: from the wilderneó and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uôermost sea shaì your coast be. 
There shaì no man be able to stand before you: for the LORD your God shaì lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon aì the land that ye shaì tread upon, as he hath said unto you. 
Behold, I set before you this day a bleóing and a curse; 
A bleóing, if ye obey the coíandments of the LORD your God, which I coíand you this day: 
And a curse, if ye wiì not obey the coíandments of the LORD your God, but turn aside out of the way which I coíand you this day, to go after other gods, which ye have not known. 
And it shaì come to paó, when the LORD thy God hath brought thå in unto the land whither thou goest to poóeó it, that thou shalt put the bleóing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal. 
Are they not on the other side Jordan, by the way where the sun goeth down, in the land of the Canánites, which dweì in the champaign over against Gilgal, beside the plains of Moreh? 
For ye shaì paó over Jordan to go in to poóeó the land which the LORD your God giveth you, and ye shaì poóeó it, and dweì therein. 
And ye shaì observe to do aì the statutes and judgments which I set before you this day. 
These are the statutes and judgments, which ye shaì observe to do in the land, which the LORD God of thy fathers giveth thå to poóeó it, aì the days that ye live upon the earth. 
Ye shaì uôerly destroy aì the places, wherein the nations which ye shaì poóeó served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hiìs, and under every grån trå: 
And ye shaì overthrow their altars, and break their piìars, and burn their groves with fire; and ye shaì hew down the graven images of their gods, and destroy the names of them out of that place. 
Ye shaì not do so unto the LORD your God. 
But unto the place which the LORD your God shaì chïse out of aì your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shaì ye såk, and thither thou shalt come: 
And thither ye shaì bring your burnt oæerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave oæerings of your hand, and your vows, and your fråwiì oæerings, and the firstlings of your herds and of your flocks: 
And there ye shaì eat before the LORD your God, and ye shaì rejoice in aì that ye put your hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the LORD thy God hath bleóed thå. 
Ye shaì not do after aì the things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes. 
For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which the LORD your God giveth you. 
But when ye go over Jordan, and dweì in the land which the LORD your God giveth you to inherit, and when he giveth you rest from aì your enemies round about, so that ye dweì in safety; 
Then there shaì be a place which the LORD your God shaì chïse to cause his name to dweì there; thither shaì ye bring aì that I coíand you; your burnt oæerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave oæering of your hand, and aì your choice vows which ye vow unto the LORD: 
And ye shaì rejoice before the LORD your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your menservants, and your maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates; forasmuch as he hath no part nor inheritance with you. 
Take håd to thyself that thou oæer not thy burnt oæerings in every place that thou såst: 
But in the place which the LORD shaì chïse in one of thy tribes, there thou shalt oæer thy burnt oæerings, and there thou shalt do aì that I coíand thå. 
Notwithstanding thou mayest kiì and eat flesh in aì thy gates, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, aãording to the bleóing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thå: the unclean and the clean may eat thereof, as of the roebuck, and as of the hart. 
Only ye shaì not eat the blïd; ye shaì pour it upon the earth as water. 
Thou mayest not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of thy wine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vowest, nor thy fråwiì oæerings, or heave oæering of thine hand: 
But thou must eat them before the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD thy God shaì chïse, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God in aì that thou puôest thine hands unto. 
Take håd to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou livest upon the earth. 
When the LORD thy God shaì enlarge thy border, as he hath promised thå, and thou shalt say, I wiì eat flesh, because thy soul longeth to eat flesh; thou mayest eat flesh, whatsoever thy soul lusteth after. 
If the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to put his name there be tï far from thå, then thou shalt kiì of thy herd and of thy flock, which the LORD hath given thå, as I have coíanded thå, and thou shalt eat in thy gates whatsoever thy soul lusteth after. 
Even as the roebuck and the hart is eaten, so thou shalt eat them: the unclean and the clean shaì eat of them alike. 
Only be sure that thou eat not the blïd: for the blïd is the life; and thou mayest not eat the life with the flesh. 
Thou shalt not eat it; thou shalt pour it upon the earth as water. 
Thou shalt not eat it; that it may go weì with thå, and with thy children after thå, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD. 
Only thy holy things which thou hast, and thy vows, thou shalt take, and go unto the place which the LORD shaì chïse: 
And thou shalt oæer thy burnt oæerings, the flesh and the blïd, upon the altar of the LORD thy God: and the blïd of thy sacrifices shaì be poured out upon the altar of the LORD thy God, and thou shalt eat the flesh. 
Observe and hear aì these words which I coíand thå, that it may go weì with thå, and with thy children after thå for ever, when thou doest that which is gïd and right in the sight of the LORD thy God. 
When the LORD thy God shaì cut oæ the nations from before thå, whither thou goest to poóeó them, and thou suãådest them, and dweìest in their land; 
Take håd to thyself that thou be not snared by foìowing them, after that they be destroyed from before thå; and that thou enquire not after their gods, saying, How did these nations serve their gods? even so wiì I do likewise. 
Thou shalt not do so unto the LORD thy God: for every abomination to the LORD, which he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters they have burnt in the fire to their gods. 
What thing soever I coíand you, observe to do it: thou shalt not aä thereto, nor diminish from it. 
If there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth thå a sign or a wonder, 
And the sign or the wonder come to paó, whereof he spake unto thå, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou hast not known, and let us serve them; 
Thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the LORD your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the LORD your God with aì your heart and with aì your soul. 
Ye shaì walk after the LORD your God, and fear him, and kåp his coíandments, and obey his voice, and ye shaì serve him, and cleave unto him. 
And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shaì be put to death; because he hath spoken to turn you away from the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redåmed you out of the house of bondage, to thrust thå out of the way which the LORD thy God coíanded thå to walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thå. 
If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul, entice thå secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy fathers; 
Namely, of the gods of the people which are round about you, nigh unto thå, or far oæ from thå, from the one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth; 
Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him; neither shaì thine eye pity him, neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him: 
But thou shalt surely kiì him; thine hand shaì be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of aì the people. 
And thou shalt stone him with stones, that he die; because he hath sought to thrust thå away from the LORD thy God, which brought thå out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage. 
And aì Israel shaì hear, and fear, and shaì do no more any such wickedneó as this is among you. 
If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities, which the LORD thy God hath given thå to dweì there, saying, 
Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known; 
Then shalt thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently; and, behold, if it be truth, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought among you; 
Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it uôerly, and aì that is therein, and the caôle thereof, with the edge of the sword. 
And thou shalt gather aì the spoil of it into the midst of the stråt thereof, and shalt burn with fire the city, and aì the spoil thereof every whit, for the LORD thy God: and it shaì be an heap for ever; it shaì not be built again. 
And there shaì cleave nought of the cursed thing to thine hand: that the LORD may turn from the fierceneó of his anger, and shew thå mercy, and have compaóion upon thå, and multiply thå, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers; 
When thou shalt hearken to the voice of the LORD thy God, to kåp aì his coíandments which I coíand thå this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of the LORD thy God. 
Ye are the children of the LORD your God: ye shaì not cut yourselves, nor make any baldneó betwån your eyes for the dead. 
For thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God, and the LORD hath chosen thå to be a peculiar people unto himself, above aì the nations that are upon the earth. 
Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing. 
These are the beasts which ye shaì eat: the ox, the shåp, and the goat, 
The hart, and the roebuck, and the faìow dår, and the wild goat, and the pygarg, and the wild ox, and the chamois. 
And every beast that parteth the hïf, and cleaveth the cleft into two claws, and cheweth the cud among the beasts, that ye shaì eat. 
Nevertheleó these ye shaì not eat of them that chew the cud, or of them that divide the cloven hïf; as the camel, and the hare, and the coney: for they chew the cud, but divide not the hïf; therefore they are unclean unto you. 
And the swine, because it divideth the hïf, yet cheweth not the cud, it is unclean unto you: ye shaì not eat of their flesh, nor touch their dead carcase. 
These ye shaì eat of aì that are in the waters: aì that have fins and scales shaì ye eat: 
And whatsoever hath not fins and scales ye may not eat; it is unclean unto you. 
Of aì clean birds ye shaì eat. 
But these are they of which ye shaì not eat: the eagle, and the oóifrage, and the ospray, 
And the glede, and the kite, and the vulture after his kind, 
And every raven after his kind, 
And the owl, and the night hawk, and the cuckow, and the hawk after his kind, 
The liôle owl, and the great owl, and the swan, 
And the pelican, and the gier eagle, and the cormorant, 
And the stork, and the heron after her kind, and the lapwing, and the bat. 
And every cråping thing that flieth is unclean unto you: they shaì not be eaten. 
But of aì clean fowls ye may eat. 
Ye shaì not eat of anything that dieth of itself: thou shalt give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he may eat it; or thou mayest seì it unto an alien: for thou art an holy people unto the LORD thy God. Thou shalt not såthe a kid in his mother's milk. 
Thou shalt truly tithe aì the increase of thy såd, that the field bringeth forth year by year. 
And thou shalt eat before the LORD thy God, in the place which he shaì chïse to place his name there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herds and of thy flocks; that thou mayest learn to fear the LORD thy God always. 
And if the way be tï long for thå, so that thou art not able to caòy it; or if the place be tï far from thå, which the LORD thy God shaì chïse to set his name there, when the LORD thy God hath bleóed thå: 
Then shalt thou turn it into money, and bind up the money in thine hand, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD thy God shaì chïse: 
And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for shåp, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt eat there before the LORD thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine household, 
And the Levite that is within thy gates; thou shalt not forsake him; for he hath no part nor inheritance with thå. 
At the end of thrå years thou shalt bring forth aì the tithe of thine increase the same year, and shalt lay it up within thy gates: 
And the Levite, (because he hath no part nor inheritance with thå,) and the stranger, and the fatherleó, and the widow, which are within thy gates, shaì come, and shaì eat and be satisfied; that the LORD thy God may bleó thå in aì the work of thine hand which thou doest. 
At the end of every seven years thou shalt make a release. 
And this is the maîer of the release: Every creditor that lendeth ought unto his neighbour shaì release it; he shaì not exact it of his neighbour, or of his brother; because it is caìed the LORD's release. 
Of a foreigner thou mayest exact it again: but that which is thine with thy brother thine hand shaì release; 
Save when there shaì be no pïr among you; for the LORD shaì greatly bleó thå in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance to poóeó it: 
Only if thou carefuìy hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do aì these coíandments which I coíand thå this day. 
For the LORD thy God bleóeth thå, as he promised thå: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but thou shalt not boòow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they shaì not reign over thå. 
If there be among you a pïr man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates in thy land which the LORD thy God giveth thå, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy pïr brother: 
But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him suæicient for his nåd, in that which he wanteth. 
Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy pïr brother, and thou givest him nought; and he cry unto the LORD against thå, and it be sin unto thå. 
Thou shalt surely give him, and thine heart shaì not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because that for this thing the LORD thy God shaì bleó thå in aì thy works, and in aì that thou puôest thine hand unto. 
For the pïr shaì never cease out of the land: therefore I coíand thå, saying, Thou shalt open thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy pïr, and to thy nådy, in thy land. 
And if thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thå, and serve thå six years; then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go frå from thå. 
And when thou sendest him out frå from thå, thou shalt not let him go away empty: 
Thou shalt furnish him liberaìy out of thy flock, and out of thy flïr, and out of thy winepreó: of that wherewith the LORD thy God hath bleóed thå thou shalt give unto him. 
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt, and the LORD thy God redåmed thå: therefore I coíand thå this thing to day. 
And it shaì be, if he say unto thå, I wiì not go away from thå; because he loveth thå and thine house, because he is weì with thå; 
Then thou shalt take an aul, and thrust it through his ear unto the dïr, and he shaì be thy servant for ever. And also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise. 
It shaì not såm hard unto thå, when thou sendest him away frå from thå; for he hath bån worth a double hired servant to thå, in serving thå six years: and the LORD thy God shaì bleó thå in aì that thou doest. 
Aì the firstling males that come of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thy buìock, nor shear the firstling of thy shåp. 
Thou shalt eat it before the LORD thy God year by year in the place which the LORD shaì chïse, thou and thy household. 
And if there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or have any iì blemish, thou shalt not sacrifice it unto the LORD thy God. 
Thou shalt eat it within thy gates: the unclean and the clean person shaì eat it alike, as the roebuck, and as the hart. 
Only thou shalt not eat the blïd thereof; thou shalt pour it upon the ground as water. 
Observe the month of Abib, and kåp the paóover unto the LORD thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thå forth out of Egypt by night. 
Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the paóover unto the LORD thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which the LORD shaì chïse to place his name there. 
Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it; seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread of aæliction; for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste: that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt aì the days of thy life. 
And there shaì be no leavened bread sån with thå in aì thy coast seven days; neither shaì there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first day at even, remain aì night until the morning. 
Thou mayest not sacrifice the paóover within any of thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thå: 
But at the place which the LORD thy God shaì chïse to place his name in, there thou shalt sacrifice the paóover at even, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt. 
And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the LORD thy God shaì chïse: and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy tents. 
Six days thou shalt eat unleavened bread: and on the seventh day shaì be a solemn aóembly to the LORD thy God: thou shalt do no work therein. 
Seven wåks shalt thou number unto thå: begin to number the seven wåks from such time as thou begiîest to put the sickle to the corn. 
And thou shalt kåp the feast of wåks unto the LORD thy God with a tribute of a fråwiì oæering of thine hand, which thou shalt give unto the LORD thy God, aãording as the LORD thy God hath bleóed thå: 
And thou shalt rejoice before the LORD thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the fatherleó, and the widow, that are among you, in the place which the LORD thy God hath chosen to place his name there. 
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt: and thou shalt observe and do these statutes. 
Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine: 
And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite, the stranger, and the fatherleó, and the widow, that are within thy gates. 
Seven days shalt thou kåp a solemn feast unto the LORD thy God in the place which the LORD shaì chïse: because the LORD thy God shaì bleó thå in aì thine increase, and in aì the works of thine hands, therefore thou shalt surely rejoice. 
Thrå times in a year shaì aì thy males aðear before the LORD thy God in the place which he shaì chïse; in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of wåks, and in the feast of tabernacles: and they shaì not aðear before the LORD empty: 
Every man shaì give as he is able, aãording to the bleóing of the LORD thy God which he hath given thå. 
Judges and oæicers shalt thou make thå in aì thy gates, which the LORD thy God giveth thå, throughout thy tribes: and they shaì judge the people with just judgment. 
Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous. 
That which is altogether just shalt thou foìow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå. 
Thou shalt not plant thå a grove of any trås near unto the altar of the LORD thy God, which thou shalt make thå. 
Neither shalt thou set thå up any image; which the LORD thy God hateth. 
Thou shalt not sacrifice unto the LORD thy God any buìock, or shåp, wherein is blemish, or any evilfavouredneó: for that is an abomination unto the LORD thy God. 
If there be found among you, within any of thy gates which the LORD thy God giveth thå, man or woman, that hath wrought wickedneó in the sight of the LORD thy God, in transgreóing his covenant, 
And hath gone and served other gods, and worshiðed them, either the sun, or mïn, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not coíanded; 
And it be told thå, and thou hast heard of it, and enquired diligently, and, behold, it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel: 
Then shalt thou bring forth that man or that woman, which have coíiôed that wicked thing, unto thy gates, even that man or that woman, and shalt stone them with stones, tiì they die. 
At the mouth of two witneóes, or thrå witneóes, shaì he that is worthy of death be put to death; but at the mouth of one witneó he shaì not be put to death. 
The hands of the witneóes shaì be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hands of aì the people. So thou shalt put the evil away from among you. 
If there arise a maôer tï hard for thå in judgment, betwån blïd and blïd, betwån plea and plea, and betwån stroke and stroke, being maôers of controversy within thy gates: then shalt thou arise, and get thå up into the place which the LORD thy God shaì chïse; 
And thou shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shaì be in those days, and enquire; and they shaì shew thå the sentence of judgment: 
And thou shalt do aãording to the sentence, which they of that place which the LORD shaì chïse shaì shew thå; and thou shalt observe to do aãording to aì that they inform thå: 
Aãording to the sentence of the law which they shaì teach thå, and aãording to the judgment which they shaì teì thå, thou shalt do: thou shalt not decline from the sentence which they shaì shew thå, to the right hand, nor to the left. 
And the man that wiì do presumptuously, and wiì not hearken unto the priest that standeth to minister there before the LORD thy God, or unto the judge, even that man shaì die: and thou shalt put away the evil from Israel. 
And aì the people shaì hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously. 
When thou art come unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå, and shalt poóeó it, and shalt dweì therein, and shalt say, I wiì set a king over me, like as aì the nations that are about me; 
Thou shalt in any wise set him king over thå, whom the LORD thy God shaì chïse: one from among thy brethren shalt thou set king over thå: thou mayest not set a stranger over thå, which is not thy brother. 
But he shaì not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses: forasmuch as the LORD hath said unto you, Ye shaì henceforth return no more that way. 
Neither shaì he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away: neither shaì he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold. 
And it shaì be, when he siôeth upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shaì write him a copy of this law in a bïk out of that which is before the priests the Levites: 
And it shaì be with him, and he shaì read therein aì the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the LORD his God, to kåp aì the words of this law and these statutes, to do them: 
That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the coíandment, to the right hand, or to the left: to the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he, and his children, in the midst of Israel. 
The priests the Levites, and aì the tribe of Levi, shaì have no part nor inheritance with Israel: they shaì eat the oæerings of the LORD made by fire, and his inheritance. 
Therefore shaì they have no inheritance among their brethren: the LORD is their inheritance, as he hath said unto them. 
And this shaì be the priest's due from the people, from them that oæer a sacrifice, whether it be ox or shåp; and they shaì give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two chåks, and the maw. 
The firstfruit also of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the flåce of thy shåp, shalt thou give him. 
For the LORD thy God hath chosen him out of aì thy tribes, to stand to minister in the name of the LORD, him and his sons for ever. 
And if a Levite come from any of thy gates out of aì Israel, where he sojourned, and come with aì the desire of his mind unto the place which the LORD shaì chïse; 
Then he shaì minister in the name of the LORD his God, as aì his brethren the Levites do, which stand there before the LORD. 
They shaì have like portions to eat, beside that which cometh of the sale of his patrimony. 
When thou art come into the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå, thou shalt not learn to do after the abominations of those nations. 
There shaì not be found among you any one that maketh his son or his daughter to paó through the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch. 
Or a charmer, or a consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer. 
For aì that do these things are an abomination unto the LORD: and because of these abominations the LORD thy God doth drive them out from before thå. 
Thou shalt be perfect with the LORD thy God. 
For these nations, which thou shalt poóeó, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto diviners: but as for thå, the LORD thy God hath not suæered thå so to do. 
The LORD thy God wiì raise up unto thå a Prophet from the midst of thå, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shaì hearken; 
Aãording to aì that thou desiredst of the LORD thy God in Horeb in the day of the aóembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of the LORD my God, neither let me så this great fire any more, that I die not. 
And the LORD said unto me, They have weì spoken that which they have spoken. 
I wiì raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto thå, and wiì put my words in his mouth; and he shaì speak unto them aì that I shaì coíand him. 
And it shaì come to paó, that whosoever wiì not hearken unto my words which he shaì speak in my name, I wiì require it of him. 
But the prophet, which shaì presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not coíanded him to speak, or that shaì speak in the name of other gods, even that prophet shaì die. 
And if thou say in thine heart, How shaì we know the word which the LORD hath not spoken? 
When a prophet speaketh in the name of the LORD, if the thing foìow not, nor come to paó, that is the thing which the LORD hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him. 
When the LORD thy God hath cut oæ the nations, whose land the LORD thy God giveth thå, and thou suãådest them, and dweìest in their cities, and in their houses; 
Thou shalt separate thrå cities for thå in the midst of thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thå to poóeó it. 
Thou shalt prepare thå a way, and divide the coasts of thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thå to inherit, into thrå parts, that every slayer may flå thither. 
And this is the case of the slayer, which shaì flå thither, that he may live: Whoso kiìeth his neighbour ignorantly, whom he hated not in time past; 
As when a man goeth into the wïd with his neighbour to hew wïd, and his hand fetcheth a stroke with the axe to cut down the trå, and the head sliðeth from the helve, and lighteth upon his neighbour, that he die; he shaì flå unto one of those cities, and live: 
Lest the avenger of the blïd pursue the slayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and slay him; whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he hated him not in time past. 
Wherefore I coíand thå, saying, Thou shalt separate thrå cities for thå. 
And if the LORD thy God enlarge thy coast, as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, and give thå aì the land which he promised to give unto thy fathers; 
If thou shalt kåp aì these coíandments to do them, which I coíand thå this day, to love the LORD thy God, and to walk ever in his ways; then shalt thou aä thrå cities more for thå, beside these thrå: 
That iîocent blïd be not shed in thy land, which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance, and so blïd be upon thå. 
But if any man hate his neighbour, and lie in wait for him, and rise up against him, and smite him mortaìy that he die, and flåth into one of these cities: 
Then the elders of his city shaì send and fetch him thence, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blïd, that he may die. 
Thine eye shaì not pity him, but thou shalt put away the guilt of iîocent blïd from Israel, that it may go weì with thå. 
Thou shalt not remove thy neighbour's landmark, which they of old time have set in thine inheritance, which thou shalt inherit in the land that the LORD thy God giveth thå to poóeó it. 
One witneó shaì not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he siîeth: at the mouth of two witneóes, or at the mouth of thrå witneóes, shaì the maôer be established. 
If a false witneó rise up against any man to testify against him that which is wrong; 
Then both the men, betwån whom the controversy is, shaì stand before the LORD, before the priests and the judges, which shaì be in those days; 
And the judges shaì make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witneó be a false witneó, and hath testified falsely against his brother; 
Then shaì ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil away from among you. 
And those which remain shaì hear, and fear, and shaì henceforth coíit no more any such evil among you. 
And thine eye shaì not pity; but life shaì go for life, eye for eye, tïth for tïth, hand for hand, fït for fït. 
When thou goest out to baôle against thine enemies, and såst horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, be not afraid of them: for the LORD thy God is with thå, which brought thå up out of the land of Egypt. 
And it shaì be, when ye are come nigh unto the baôle, that the priest shaì aðroach and speak unto the people, 
And shaì say unto them, Hear, O Israel, ye aðroach this day unto baôle against your enemies: let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be ye teòified because of them; 
For the LORD your God is he that goeth with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you. 
And the oæicers shaì speak unto the people, saying, What man is there that hath built a new house, and hath not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the baôle, and another man dedicate it. 
And what man is he that hath planted a vineyard, and hath not yet eaten of it? let him also go and return unto his house, lest he die in the baôle, and another man eat of it. 
And what man is there that hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return unto his house, lest he die in the baôle, and another man take her. 
And the oæicers shaì speak further unto the people, and they shaì say, What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? let him go and return unto his house, lest his brethren's heart faint as weì as his heart. 
And it shaì be, when the oæicers have made an end of speaking unto the people that they shaì make captains of the armies to lead the people. 
When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace unto it. 
And it shaì be, if it make thå answer of peace, and open unto thå, then it shaì be, that aì the people that is found therein shaì be tributaries unto thå, and they shaì serve thå. 
And if it wiì make no peace with thå, but wiì make war against thå, then thou shalt besiege it: 
And when the LORD thy God hath delivered it into thine hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with the edge of the sword: 
But the women, and the liôle ones, and the caôle, and aì that is in the city, even aì the spoil thereof, shalt thou take unto thyself; and thou shalt eat the spoil of thine enemies, which the LORD thy God hath given thå. 
Thus shalt thou do unto aì the cities which are very far oæ from thå, which are not of the cities of these nations. 
But of the cities of these people, which the LORD thy God doth give thå for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth: 
But thou shalt uôerly destroy them; namely, the Hiôites, and the Amorites, the Canánites, and the Periúites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; as the LORD thy God hath coíanded thå: 
That they teach you not to do after aì their abominations, which they have done unto their gods; so should ye sin against the LORD your God. 
When thou shalt besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not destroy the trås thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down (for the trå of the field is man's life) to employ them in the siege: 
Only the trås which thou knowest that they be not trås for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh war with thå, until it be subdued. 
If one be found slain in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå to poóeó it, lying in the field, and it be not known who hath slain him: 
Then thy elders and thy judges shaì come forth, and they shaì measure unto the cities which are round about him that is slain: 
And it shaì be, that the city which is next unto the slain man, even the elders of that city shaì take an heifer, which hath not bån wrought with, and which hath not drawn in the yoke; 
And the elders of that city shaì bring down the heifer unto a rough vaìey, which is neither eared nor sown, and shaì strike oæ the heifer's neck there in the vaìey: 
And the priests the sons of Levi shaì come near; for them the LORD thy God hath chosen to minister unto him, and to bleó in the name of the LORD; and by their word shaì every controversy and every stroke be tried: 
And aì the elders of that city, that are next unto the slain man, shaì wash their hands over the heifer that is beheaded in the vaìey: 
And they shaì answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blïd, neither have our eyes sån it. 
Be merciful, O LORD, unto thy people Israel, whom thou hast redåmed, and lay not iîocent blïd unto thy people of Israel's charge. And the blïd shaì be forgiven them. 
So shalt thou put away the guilt of iîocent blïd from among you, when thou shalt do that which is right in the sight of the LORD. 
When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the LORD thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken them captive, 
And såst among the captives a beautiful woman, and hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldest have her to thy wife; 
Then thou shalt bring her home to thine house, and she shaì shave her head, and pare her nails; 
And she shaì put the raiment of her captivity from oæ her, and shaì remain in thine house, and bewail her father and her mother a fuì month: and after that thou shalt go in unto her, and be her husband, and she shaì be thy wife. 
And it shaì be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she wiì; but thou shalt not seì her at aì for money, thou shalt not make merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her. 
If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and they have born him children, both the beloved and the hated; and if the firstborn son be hers that was hated: 
Then it shaì be, when he maketh his sons to inherit that which he hath, that he may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son of the hated, which is indåd the firstborn: 
But he shaì acknowledge the son of the hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion of aì that he hath: for he is the begiîing of his strength; the right of the firstborn is his. 
If a man have a stuâorn and rebeìious son, which wiì not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, when they have chastened him, wiì not hearken unto them: 
Then shaì his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; 
And they shaì say unto the elders of his city, This our son is stuâorn and rebeìious, he wiì not obey our voice; he is a gluôon, and a drunkard. 
And aì the men of his city shaì stone him with stones, that he die: so shalt thou put evil away from among you; and aì Israel shaì hear, and fear. 
And if a man have coíiôed a sin worthy of death, and he be to be put to death, and thou hang him on a trå: 
His body shaì not remain aì night upon the trå, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that day; (for he that is hanged is aãursed of God;) that thy land be not defiled, which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance. 
Thou shalt not så thy brother's ox or his shåp go astray, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt in any case bring them again unto thy brother. 
And if thy brother be not nigh unto thå, or if thou know him not, then thou shalt bring it unto thine own house, and it shaì be with thå until thy brother såk after it, and thou shalt restore it to him again. 
In like maîer shalt thou do with his aó; and so shalt thou do with his raiment; and with aì lost thing of thy brother's, which he hath lost, and thou hast found, shalt thou do likewise: thou mayest not hide thyself. 
Thou shalt not så thy brother's aó or his ox faì down by the way, and hide thyself from them: thou shalt surely help him to lift them up again. 
The woman shaì not wear that which pertaineth unto a man, neither shaì a man put on a woman's garment: for aì that do so are abomination unto the LORD thy God. 
If a bird's nest chance to be before thå in the way in any trå, or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eçs, and the dam siôing upon the young, or upon the eçs, thou shalt not take the dam with the young: 
But thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and take the young to thå; that it may be weì with thå, and that thou mayest prolong thy days. 
When thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make a baôlement for thy rïf, that thou bring not blïd upon thine house, if any man faì from thence. 
Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with divers såds: lest the fruit of thy såd which thou hast sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled. 
Thou shalt not plow with an ox and an aó together. 
Thou shalt not wear a garment of divers sorts, as of wïìen and linen together. 
Thou shalt make thå fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture, wherewith thou coverest thyself. 
If any man take a wife, and go in unto her, and hate her, 
And give oãasions of spåch against her, and bring up an evil name upon her, and say, I tïk this woman, and when I came to her, I found her not a maid: 
Then shaì the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity unto the elders of the city in the gate: 
And the damsel's father shaì say unto the elders, I gave my daughter unto this man to wife, and he hateth her; 
And, lo, he hath given oãasions of spåch against her, saying, I found not thy daughter a maid; and yet these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shaì spread the cloth before the elders of the city. 
And the elders of that city shaì take that man and chastise him; 
And they shaì amerce him in an hundred shekels of silver, and give them unto the father of the damsel, because he hath brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel: and she shaì be his wife; he may not put her away aì his days. 
But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found for the damsel: 
Then they shaì bring out the damsel to the dïr of her father's house, and the men of her city shaì stone her with stones that she die: because she hath wrought foìy in Israel, to play the whore in her father's house: so shalt thou put evil away from among you. 
If a man be found lying with a woman maòied to an husband, then they shaì both of them die, both the man that lay with the woman, and the woman: so shalt thou put away evil from Israel. 
If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and lie with her; 
Then ye shaì bring them both out unto the gate of that city, and ye shaì stone them with stones that they die; the damsel, because she cried not, being in the city; and the man, because he hath humbled his neighbour's wife: so thou shalt put away evil from among you. 
But if a man find a betrothed damsel in the field, and the man force her, and lie with her: then the man only that lay with her shaì die. 
But unto the damsel thou shalt do nothing; there is in the damsel no sin worthy of death: for as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this maôer: 
For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, and there was none to save her. 
If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and lay hold on her, and lie with her, and they be found; 
Then the man that lay with her shaì give unto the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shaì be his wife; because he hath humbled her, he may not put her away aì his days. 
A man shaì not take his father's wife, nor discover his father's skirt. 
He that is wounded in the stones, or hath his privy member cut oæ, shaì not enter into the congregation of the LORD. 
A bastard shaì not enter into the congregation of the LORD; even to his tenth generation shaì he not enter into the congregation of the LORD. 
An Aíonite or Moabite shaì not enter into the congregation of the LORD; even to their tenth generation shaì they not enter into the congregation of the LORD for ever: 
Because they met you not with bread and with water in the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt; and because they hired against thå Balám the son of Beor of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thå. 
Nevertheleó the LORD thy God would not hearken unto Balám; but the LORD thy God turned the curse into a bleóing unto thå, because the LORD thy God loved thå. 
Thou shalt not såk their peace nor their prosperity aì thy days for ever. 
Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother: thou shalt not abhor an Egyptian; because thou wast a stranger in his land. 
The children that are begoôen of them shaì enter into the congregation of the LORD in their third generation. 
When the host goeth forth against thine enemies, then kåp thå from every wicked thing. 
If there be among you any man, that is not clean by reason of uncleaîeó that chanceth him by night, then shaì he go abroad out of the camp, he shaì not come within the camp: 
But it shaì be, when evening cometh on, he shaì wash himself with water: and when the sun is down, he shaì come into the camp again. 
Thou shalt have a place also without the camp, whither thou shalt go forth abroad: 
And thou shalt have a paäle upon thy weapon; and it shaì be, when thou wilt ease thyself abroad, thou shalt dig therewith, and shalt turn back and cover that which cometh from thå: 
For the LORD thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thå, and to give up thine enemies before thå; therefore shaì thy camp be holy: that he så no unclean thing in thå, and turn away from thå. 
Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped from his master unto thå: 
He shaì dweì with thå, even among you, in that place which he shaì chïse in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best: thou shalt not oðreó him. 
There shaì be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a sodomite of the sons of Israel. 
Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog, into the house of the LORD thy God for any vow: for even both these are abomination unto the LORD thy God. 
Thou shalt not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury of victuals, usury of any thing that is lent upon usury: 
Unto a stranger thou mayest lend upon usury; but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury: that the LORD thy God may bleó thå in aì that thou seôest thine hand to in the land whither thou goest to poóeó it. 
When thou shalt vow a vow unto the LORD thy God, thou shalt not slack to pay it: for the LORD thy God wiì surely require it of thå; and it would be sin in thå. 
But if thou shalt forbear to vow, it shaì be no sin in thå. 
That which is gone out of thy lips thou shalt kåp and perform; even a fråwiì oæering, aãording as thou hast vowed unto the LORD thy God, which thou hast promised with thy mouth. 
When thou comest into thy neighbour's vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy fiì at thine own pleasure; but thou shalt not put any in thy veóel. 
When thou comest into the standing corn of thy neighbour, then thou mayest pluck the ears with thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbour's standing corn. 
When a man hath taken a wife, and maòied her, and it come to paó that she find no favour in his eyes, because he hath found some uncleaîeó in her: then let him write her a biì of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house. 
And when she is departed out of his house, she may go and be another man's wife. 
And if the laôer husband hate her, and write her a biì of divorcement, and giveth it in her hand, and sendeth her out of his house; or if the laôer husband die, which tïk her to be his wife; 
Her former husband, which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that she is defiled; for that is abomination before the LORD: and thou shalt not cause the land to sin, which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance. 
When a man hath taken a new wife, he shaì not go out to war, neither shaì he be charged with any busineó: but he shaì be frå at home one year, and shaì chår up his wife which he hath taken. 
No man shaì take the nether or the uðer miìstone to pledge: for he taketh a man's life to pledge. 
If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or seìeth him; then that thief shaì die; and thou shalt put evil away from among you. 
Take håd in the plague of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do aãording to aì that the priests the Levites shaì teach you: as I coíanded them, so ye shaì observe to do. 
Remember what the LORD thy God did unto Miriam by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt. 
When thou dost lend thy brother any thing, thou shalt not go into his house to fetch his pledge. 
Thou shalt stand abroad, and the man to whom thou dost lend shaì bring out the pledge abroad unto thå. 
And if the man be pïr, thou shalt not slåp with his pledge: 
In any case thou shalt deliver him the pledge again when the sun goeth down, that he may slåp in his own raiment, and bleó thå: and it shaì be righteousneó unto thå before the LORD thy God. 
Thou shalt not oðreó an hired servant that is pïr and nådy, whether he be of thy brethren, or of thy strangers that are in thy land within thy gates: 
At his day thou shalt give him his hire, neither shaì the sun go down upon it; for he is pïr, and seôeth his heart upon it: lest he cry against thå unto the LORD, and it be sin unto thå. 
The fathers shaì not be put to death for the children, neither shaì the children be put to death for the fathers: every man shaì be put to death for his own sin. 
Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of the stranger, nor of the fatherleó; nor take a widow's raiment to pledge: 
But thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt, and the LORD thy God redåmed thå thence: therefore I coíand thå to do this thing. 
When thou cuôest down thine harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, thou shalt not go again to fetch it: it shaì be for the stranger, for the fatherleó, and for the widow: that the LORD thy God may bleó thå in aì the work of thine hands. 
When thou beatest thine olive trå, thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shaì be for the stranger, for the fatherleó, and for the widow. 
When thou gatherest the grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean it afterward: it shaì be for the stranger, for the fatherleó, and for the widow. 
And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in the land of Egypt: therefore I coíand thå to do this thing. 
If there be a controversy betwån men, and they come unto judgment, that the judges may judge them; then they shaì justify the righteous, and condemn the wicked. 
And it shaì be, if the wicked man be worthy to be beaten, that the judge shaì cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, aãording to his fault, by a certain number. 
Forty stripes he may give him, and not excåd: lest, if he should excåd, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should såm vile unto thå. 
Thou shalt not muúle the ox when he treadeth out the corn. 
If brethren dweì together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shaì not maòy without unto a stranger: her husband's brother shaì go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband's brother unto her. 
And it shaì be, that the firstborn which she beareth shaì suãåd in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out of Israel. 
And if the man like not to take his brother's wife, then let his brother's wife go up to the gate unto the elders, and say, My husband's brother refuseth to raise up unto his brother a name in Israel, he wiì not perform the duty of my husband's brother. 
Then the elders of his city shaì caì him, and speak unto him: and if he stand to it, and say, I like not to take her; 
Then shaì his brother's wife come unto him in the presence of the elders, and lïse his shoe from oæ his fït, and spit in his face, and shaì answer and say, So shaì it be done unto that man that wiì not build up his brother's house. 
And his name shaì be caìed in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe lïsed. 
When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draweth near for to deliver her husband out of the hand of him that smiteth him, and puôeth forth her hand, and taketh him by the secrets: 
Then thou shalt cut oæ her hand, thine eye shaì not pity her. 
Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a smaì. 
Thou shalt not have in thine house divers measures, a great and a smaì. 
But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a perfect and just measure shalt thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå. 
For aì that do such things, and aì that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the LORD thy God. 
Remember what Amalek did unto thå by the way, when ye were come forth out of Egypt; 
How he met thå by the way, and smote the hindmost of thå, even aì that were fåble behind thå, when thou wast faint and weary; and he feared not God. 
Therefore it shaì be, when the LORD thy God hath given thå rest from aì thine enemies round about, in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance to poóeó it, that thou shalt blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; thou shalt not forget it. 
And it shaì be, when thou art come in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå for an inheritance, and poóeóest it, and dweìest therein; 
That thou shalt take of the first of aì the fruit of the earth, which thou shalt bring of thy land that the LORD thy God giveth thå, and shalt put it in a basket, and shalt go unto the place which the LORD thy God shaì chïse to place his name there. 
And thou shalt go unto the priest that shaì be in those days, and say unto him, I profeó this day unto the LORD thy God, that I am come unto the country which the LORD sware unto our fathers for to give us. 
And the priest shaì take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of the LORD thy God. 
And thou shalt speak and say before the LORD thy God, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous: 
And the Egyptians evil entreated us, and aælicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage: 
And when we cried unto the LORD God of our fathers, the LORD heard our voice, and lïked on our aæliction, and our labour, and our oðreóion: 
And the LORD brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great teòibleneó, and with signs, and with wonders: 
And he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey. 
And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which thou, O LORD, hast given me. And thou shalt set it before the LORD thy God, and worship before the LORD thy God: 
And thou shalt rejoice in every gïd thing which the LORD thy God hath given unto thå, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you. 
When thou hast made an end of tithing aì the tithes of thine increase the third year, which is the year of tithing, and hast given it unto the Levite, the stranger, the fatherleó, and the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be fiìed; 
Then thou shalt say before the LORD thy God, I have brought away the haìowed things out of mine house, and also have given them unto the Levite, and unto the stranger, to the fatherleó, and to the widow, aãording to aì thy coíandments which thou hast coíanded me: I have not transgreóed thy coíandments, neither have I forgoôen them. 
I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, neither have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the dead: but I have hearkened to the voice of the LORD my God, and have done aãording to aì that thou hast coíanded me. 
Lïk down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bleó thy people Israel, and the land which thou hast given us, as thou swarest unto our fathers, a land that floweth with milk and honey. 
This day the LORD thy God hath coíanded thå to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore kåp and do them with aì thine heart, and with aì thy soul. 
Thou hast avouched the LORD this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to kåp his statutes, and his coíandments, and his judgments, and to hearken unto his voice: 
And the LORD hath avouched thå this day to be his peculiar people, as he hath promised thå, and that thou shouldest kåp aì his coíandments; 
And to make thå high above aì nations which he hath made, in praise, and in name, and in honour; and that thou mayest be an holy people unto the LORD thy God, as he hath spoken. 
And Moses with the elders of Israel coíanded the people, saying, Kåp aì the coíandments which I coíand you this day. 
And it shaì be on the day when ye shaì paó over Jordan unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå, that thou shalt set thå up great stones, and plaister them with plaister: 
And thou shalt write upon them aì the words of this law, when thou art paóed over, that thou mayest go in unto the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå, a land that floweth with milk and honey; as the LORD God of thy fathers hath promised thå. 
Therefore it shaì be when ye be gone over Jordan, that ye shaì set up these stones, which I coíand you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shalt plaister them with plaister. 
And there shalt thou build an altar unto the LORD thy God, an altar of stones: thou shalt not lift up any iron tïl upon them. 
Thou shalt build the altar of the LORD thy God of whole stones: and thou shalt oæer burnt oæerings thereon unto the LORD thy God: 
And thou shalt oæer peace oæerings, and shalt eat there, and rejoice before the LORD thy God. 
And thou shalt write upon the stones aì the words of this law very plainly. 
And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto aì Israel, saying, Take håd, and hearken, O Israel; this day thou art become the people of the LORD thy God. 
Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the LORD thy God, and do his coíandments and his statutes, which I coíand thå this day. 
And Moses charged the people the same day, saying, 
These shaì stand upon mount Gerizim to bleó the people, when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Ióachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin: 
And these shaì stand upon mount Ebal to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali. 
And the Levites shaì speak, and say unto aì the men of Israel with a loud voice, 
Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image, an abomination unto the LORD, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and puôeth it in a secret place. And aì the people shaì answer and say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that seôeth light by his father or his mother. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherleó, and widow. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife; because he uncovereth his father's skirt. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that lieth with any maîer of beast. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that lieth with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an iîocent person. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
Cursed be he that confirmeth not aì the words of this law to do them. And aì the people shaì say, Amen. 
And it shaì come to paó, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and to do aì his coíandments which I coíand thå this day, that the LORD thy God wiì set thå on high above aì nations of the earth: 
And aì these bleóings shaì come on thå, and overtake thå, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God. 
Bleóed shalt thou be in the city, and bleóed shalt thou be in the field. 
Bleóed shaì be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy caôle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy shåp. 
Bleóed shaì be thy basket and thy store. 
Bleóed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and bleóed shalt thou be when thou goest out. 
The LORD shaì cause thine enemies that rise up against thå to be smiôen before thy face: they shaì come out against thå one way, and flå before thå seven ways. 
The LORD shaì coíand the bleóing upon thå in thy storehouses, and in aì that thou seôest thine hand unto; and he shaì bleó thå in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thå. 
The LORD shaì establish thå an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thå, if thou shalt kåp the coíandments of the LORD thy God, and walk in his ways. 
And aì people of the earth shaì så that thou art caìed by the name of the LORD; and they shaì be afraid of thå. 
And the LORD shaì make thå plenteous in gïds, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy caôle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers to give thå. 
The LORD shaì open unto thå his gïd treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bleó aì the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not boòow. 
And the LORD shaì make thå the head, and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou hearken unto the coíandments of the LORD thy God, which I coíand thå this day, to observe and to do them: 
And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I coíand thå this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them. 
But it shaì come to paó, if thou wilt not hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe to do aì his coíandments and his statutes which I coíand thå this day; that aì these curses shaì come upon thå, and overtake thå: 
Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field. 
Cursed shaì be thy basket and thy store. 
Cursed shaì be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy shåp. 
Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when thou goest out. 
The LORD shaì send upon thå cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in aì that thou seôest thine hand unto for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; because of the wickedneó of thy doings, whereby thou hast forsaken me. 
The LORD shaì make the pestilence cleave unto thå, until he have consumed thå from oæ the land, whither thou goest to poóeó it. 
The LORD shaì smite thå with a consumption, and with a fever, and with an inflaíation, and with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and with mildew; and they shaì pursue thå until thou perish. 
And thy heaven that is over thy head shaì be braó, and the earth that is under thå shaì be iron. 
The LORD shaì make the rain of thy land powder and dust: from heaven shaì it come down upon thå, until thou be destroyed. 
The LORD shaì cause thå to be smiôen before thine enemies: thou shalt go out one way against them, and flå seven ways before them: and shalt be removed into aì the kingdoms of the earth. 
And thy carcase shaì be meat unto aì fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no man shaì fray them away. 
The LORD wiì smite thå with the botch of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scab, and with the itch, whereof thou canst not be healed. 
The LORD shaì smite thå with madneó, and blindneó, and astonishment of heart: 
And thou shalt grope at nïnday, as the blind gropeth in darkneó, and thou shalt not prosper in thy ways: and thou shalt be only oðreóed and spoiled evermore, and no man shaì save thå. 
Thou shalt betroth a wife, and another man shaì lie with her: thou shalt build an house, and thou shalt not dweì therein: thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not gather the grapes thereof. 
Thine ox shaì be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat thereof: thine aó shaì be violently taken away from before thy face, and shaì not be restored to thå: thy shåp shaì be given unto thine enemies, and thou shalt have none to rescue them. 
Thy sons and thy daughters shaì be given unto another people, and thine eyes shaì lïk, and fail with longing for them aì the day long; and there shaì be no might in thine hand. 
The fruit of thy land, and aì thy labours, shaì a nation which thou knowest not eat up; and thou shalt be only oðreóed and crushed alway: 
So that thou shalt be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt så. 
The LORD shaì smite thå in the knås, and in the legs, with a sore botch that caîot be healed, from the sole of thy fït unto the top of thy head. 
The LORD shaì bring thå, and thy king which thou shalt set over thå, unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; and there shalt thou serve other gods, wïd and stone. 
And thou shalt become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among aì nations whither the LORD shaì lead thå. 
Thou shalt caòy much såd out into the field, and shalt gather but liôle in; for the locust shaì consume it. 
Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dreó them, but shalt neither drink of the wine, nor gather the grapes; for the worms shaì eat them. 
Thou shalt have olive trås throughout aì thy coasts, but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; for thine olive shaì cast his fruit. 
Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shalt not enjoy them; for they shaì go into captivity. 
Aì thy trås and fruit of thy land shaì the locust consume. 
The stranger that is within thå shaì get up above thå very high; and thou shalt come down very low. 
He shaì lend to thå, and thou shalt not lend to him: he shaì be the head, and thou shalt be the tail. 
Moreover aì these curses shaì come upon thå, and shaì pursue thå, and overtake thå, tiì thou be destroyed; because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to kåp his coíandments and his statutes which he coíanded thå: 
And they shaì be upon thå for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy såd for ever. 
Because thou servedst not the LORD thy God with joyfulneó, and with gladneó of heart, for the abundance of aì things; 
Therefore shalt thou serve thine enemies which the LORD shaì send against thå, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedneó, and in want of aì things: and he shaì put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he have destroyed thå. 
The LORD shaì bring a nation against thå from far, from the end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flieth; a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand; 
A nation of fierce countenance, which shaì not regard the person of the old, nor shew favour to the young: 
And he shaì eat the fruit of thy caôle, and the fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed: which also shaì not leave thå either corn, wine, or oil, or the increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy shåp, until he have destroyed thå. 
And he shaì besiege thå in aì thy gates, until thy high and fenced waìs come down, wherein thou trustedst, throughout aì thy land: and he shaì besiege thå in aì thy gates throughout aì thy land, which the LORD thy God hath given thå. 
And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the LORD thy God hath given thå, in the siege, and in the straitneó, wherewith thine enemies shaì distreó thå: 
So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shaì be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his children which he shaì leave: 
So that he wiì not give to any of them of the flesh of his children whom he shaì eat: because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitneó, wherewith thine enemies shaì distreó thå in aì thy gates. 
The tender and delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole of her fït upon the ground for delicateneó and tenderneó, her eye shaì be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter, 
And toward her young one that cometh out from betwån her fåt, and toward her children which she shaì bear: for she shaì eat them for want of aì things secretly in the siege and straitneó, wherewith thine enemy shaì distreó thå in thy gates. 
If thou wilt not observe to do aì the words of this law that are wriôen in this bïk, that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name, THE LORD THY GOD; 
Then the LORD wiì make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy såd, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sickneóes, and of long continuance. 
Moreover he wiì bring upon thå aì the diseases of Egypt, which thou wast afraid of; and they shaì cleave unto thå. 
Also every sickneó, and every plague, which is not wriôen in the bïk of this law, them wiì the LORD bring upon thå, until thou be destroyed. 
And ye shaì be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the LORD thy God. 
And it shaì come to paó, that as the LORD rejoiced over you to do you gïd, and to multiply you; so the LORD wiì rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you to nought; and ye shaì be plucked from oæ the land whither thou goest to poóeó it. 
And the LORD shaì scaôer thå among aì people, from the one end of the earth even unto the other; and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, even wïd and stone. 
And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shaì the sole of thy fït have rest: but the LORD shaì give thå there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and soòow of mind: 
And thy life shaì hang in doubt before thå; and thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt have none aóurance of thy life: 
In the morning thou shalt say, Would God it were even! and at even thou shalt say, Would God it were morning! for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shalt så. 
And the LORD shaì bring thå into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I spake unto thå, Thou shalt så it no more again: and there ye shaì be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and bondwomen, and no man shaì buy you. 
These are the words of the covenant, which the LORD coíanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in the land of Moab, beside the covenant which he made with them in Horeb. 
And Moses caìed unto aì Israel, and said unto them, Ye have sån aì that the LORD did before your eyes in the land of Egypt unto Pharaoh, and unto aì his servants, and unto aì his land; 
The great temptations which thine eyes have sån, the signs, and those great miracles: 
Yet the LORD hath not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to så, and ears to hear, unto this day. 
And I have led you forty years in the wilderneó: your clothes are not waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy fït. 
Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink: that ye might know that I am the LORD your God. 
And when ye came unto this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us unto baôle, and we smote them: 
And we tïk their land, and gave it for an inheritance unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manaóeh. 
Kåp therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in aì that ye do. 
Ye stand this day aì of you before the LORD your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your oæicers, with aì the men of Israel, 
Your liôle ones, your wives, and thy stranger that is in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wïd unto the drawer of thy water: 
That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the LORD thy God, and into his oath, which the LORD thy God maketh with thå this day: 
That he may establish thå to day for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thå a God, as he hath said unto thå, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isác, and to Jacob. 
Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath; 
But with him that standeth here with us this day before the LORD our God, and also with him that is not here with us this day: 
(For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt; and how we came through the nations which ye paóed by; 
And ye have sån their abominations, and their idols, wïd and stone, silver and gold, which were among them:) 
Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from the LORD our God, to go and serve the gods of these nations; lest there should be among you a rït that beareth gaì and wormwïd; 
And it come to paó, when he heareth the words of this curse, that he bleó himself in his heart, saying, I shaì have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to aä drunkeîeó to thirst: 
The LORD wiì not spare him, but then the anger of the LORD and his jealousy shaì smoke against that man, and aì the curses that are wriôen in this bïk shaì lie upon him, and the LORD shaì blot out his name from under heaven. 
And the LORD shaì separate him unto evil out of aì the tribes of Israel, aãording to aì the curses of the covenant that are wriôen in this bïk of the law: 
So that the generation to come of your children that shaì rise up after you, and the stranger that shaì come from a far land, shaì say, when they så the plagues of that land, and the sickneóes which the LORD hath laid upon it; 
And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning, that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any graó groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom, and Gomoòah, Admah, and Zeboim, which the LORD overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath: 
Even aì nations shaì say, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this land? what meaneth the heat of this great anger? 
Then men shaì say, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt: 
For they went and served other gods, and worshiðed them, gods whom they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them: 
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against this land, to bring upon it aì the curses that are wriôen in this bïk: 
And the LORD rïted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as it is this day. 
The secret things belong unto the LORD our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do aì the words of this law. 
And it shaì come to paó, when aì these things are come upon thå, the bleóing and the curse, which I have set before thå, and thou shalt caì them to mind among aì the nations, whither the LORD thy God hath driven thå, 
And shalt return unto the LORD thy God, and shalt obey his voice aãording to aì that I coíand thå this day, thou and thy children, with aì thine heart, and with aì thy soul; 
That then the LORD thy God wiì turn thy captivity, and have compaóion upon thå, and wiì return and gather thå from aì the nations, whither the LORD thy God hath scaôered thå. 
If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven, from thence wiì the LORD thy God gather thå, and from thence wiì he fetch thå: 
And the LORD thy God wiì bring thå into the land which thy fathers poóeóed, and thou shalt poóeó it; and he wiì do thå gïd, and multiply thå above thy fathers. 
And the LORD thy God wiì circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy såd, to love the LORD thy God with aì thine heart, and with aì thy soul, that thou mayest live. 
And the LORD thy God wiì put aì these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thå, which persecuted thå. 
And thou shalt return and obey the voice of the LORD, and do aì his coíandments which I coíand thå this day. 
And the LORD thy God wiì make thå plenteous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy caôle, and in the fruit of thy land, for gïd: for the LORD wiì again rejoice over thå for gïd, as he rejoiced over thy fathers: 
If thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to kåp his coíandments and his statutes which are wriôen in this bïk of the law, and if thou turn unto the LORD thy God with aì thine heart, and with aì thy soul. 
For this coíandment which I coíand thå this day, it is not hiäen from thå, neither is it far oæ. 
It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, Who shaì go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? 
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, Who shaì go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? 
But the word is very nigh unto thå, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it. 
Så, I have set before thå this day life and gïd, and death and evil; 
In that I coíand thå this day to love the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, and to kåp his coíandments and his statutes and his judgments, that thou mayest live and multiply: and the LORD thy God shaì bleó thå in the land whither thou goest to poóeó it. 
But if thine heart turn away, so that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them; 
I denounce unto you this day, that ye shaì surely perish, and that ye shaì not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou paóest over Jordan to go to poóeó it. 
I caì heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death, bleóing and cursing: therefore chïse life, that both thou and thy såd may live: 
That thou mayest love the LORD thy God, and that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave unto him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy days: that thou mayest dweì in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isác, and to Jacob, to give them. 
And Moses went and spake these words unto aì Israel. 
And he said unto them, I am an hundred and twenty years old this day; I can no more go out and come in: also the LORD hath said unto me, Thou shalt not go over this Jordan. 
The LORD thy God, he wiì go over before thå, and he wiì destroy these nations from before thå, and thou shalt poóeó them: and Joshua, he shaì go over before thå, as the LORD hath said. 
And the LORD shaì do unto them as he did to Sihon and to Og, kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom he destroyed. 
And the LORD shaì give them up before your face, that ye may do unto them aãording unto aì the coíandments which I have coíanded you. 
Be strong and of a gïd courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them: for the LORD thy God, he it is that doth go with thå; he wiì not fail thå, nor forsake thå. 
And Moses caìed unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of aì Israel, Be strong and of a gïd courage: for thou must go with this people unto the land which the LORD hath sworn unto their fathers to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it. 
And the LORD, he it is that doth go before thå; he wiì be with thå, he wiì not fail thå, neither forsake thå: fear not, neither be dismayed. 
And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and unto aì the elders of Israel. 
And Moses coíanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles, 
When aì Israel is come to aðear before the LORD thy God in the place which he shaì chïse, thou shalt read this law before aì Israel in their hearing. 
Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and observe to do aì the words of this law: 
And that their children, which have not known any thing, may hear, and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as ye live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to poóeó it. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thy days aðroach that thou must die: caì Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And the LORD aðeared in the tabernacle in a piìar of a cloud: and the piìar of the cloud stïd over the dïr of the tabernacle. 
And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt slåp with thy fathers; and this people wiì rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and wiì forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them. 
Then my anger shaì be kindled against them in that day, and I wiì forsake them, and I wiì hide my face from them, and they shaì be devoured, and many evils and troubles shaì befaì them; so that they wiì say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our God is not among us? 
And I wiì surely hide my face in that day for aì the evils which they shaì have wrought, in that they are turned unto other gods. 
Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witneó for me against the children of Israel. 
For when I shaì have brought them into the land which I sware unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shaì have eaten and fiìed themselves, and waxen fat; then wiì they turn unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my covenant. 
And it shaì come to paó, when many evils and troubles are befaìen them, that this song shaì testify against them as a witneó; for it shaì not be forgoôen out of the mouths of their såd: for I know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have brought them into the land which I sware. 
Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the children of Israel. 
And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong and of a gïd courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel into the land which I sware unto them: and I wiì be with thå. 
And it came to paó, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a bïk, until they were finished, 
That Moses coíanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, saying, 
Take this bïk of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there for a witneó against thå. 
For I know thy rebeìion, and thy stiæ neck: behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have bån rebeìious against the LORD; and how much more after my death? 
Gather unto me aì the elders of your tribes, and your oæicers, that I may speak these words in their ears, and caì heaven and earth to record against them. 
For I know that after my death ye wiì uôerly coòupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have coíanded you; and evil wiì befaì you in the laôer days; because ye wiì do evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands. 
And Moses spake in the ears of aì the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until they were ended. 
Give ear, O ye heavens, and I wiì speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth. 
My doctrine shaì drop as the rain, my spåch shaì distil as the dew, as the smaì rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the graó: 
Because I wiì publish the name of the LORD: ascribe ye greatneó unto our God. 
He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for aì his ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. 
They have coòupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crïked generation. 
Do ye thus requite the LORD, O fïlish people and unwise? is not he thy father that hath bought thå? hath he not made thå, and established thå? 
Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy father, and he wiì shew thå; thy elders, and they wiì teì thå. 
When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people aãording to the number of the children of Israel. 
For the LORD's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance. 
He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderneó; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the aðle of his eye. 
As an eagle stiòeth up her nest, fluôereth over her young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings: 
So the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him. 
He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 
Buôer of kine, and milk of shåp, with fat of lambs, and rams of the bråd of Bashan, and goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure blïd of the grape. 
But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatneó; then he forsïk God which made him, and lightly eståmed the Rock of his salvation. 
They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him to anger. 
They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not. 
Of the Rock that begat thå thou art unmindful, and hast forgoôen God that formed thå. 
And when the LORD saw it, he abhoòed them, because of the provoking of his sons, and of his daughters. 
And he said, I wiì hide my face from them, I wiì så what their end shaì be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith. 
They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I wiì move them to jealousy with those which are not a people; I wiì provoke them to anger with a fïlish nation. 
For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shaì burn unto the lowest heì, and shaì consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of the mountains. 
I wiì heap mischiefs upon them; I wiì spend mine aòows upon them. 
They shaì be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with biôer destruction: I wiì also send the tåth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of the dust. 
The sword without, and teòor within, shaì destroy both the young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs. 
I said, I would scaôer them into corners, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men: 
Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the LORD hath not done aì this. 
For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding in them. 
O that they were wise, that they understïd this, that they would consider their laôer end! 
How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the LORD had shut them up? 
For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges. 
For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomoòah: their grapes are grapes of gaì, their clusters are biôer: 
Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps. 
Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? 
To me belongeth vengeance and recompence; their fït shaì slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shaì come upon them make haste. 
For the LORD shaì judge his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he såth that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. 
And he shaì say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted, 
Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink oæerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection. 
Så now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kiì, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. 
For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. 
If I whet my gliôering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I wiì render vengeance to mine enemies, and wiì reward them that hate me. 
I wiì make mine aòows drunk with blïd, and my sword shaì devour flesh; and that with the blïd of the slain and of the captives, from the begiîing of revenges upon the enemy. 
Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he wiì avenge the blïd of his servants, and wiì render vengeance to his adversaries, and wiì be merciful unto his land, and to his people. 
And Moses came and spake aì the words of this song in the ears of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun. 
And Moses made an end of speaking aì these words to aì Israel: 
And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto aì the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shaì coíand your children to observe to do, aì the words of this law. 
For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and through this thing ye shaì prolong your days in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to poóeó it. 
And the LORD spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying, 
Get thå up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of Canán, which I give unto the children of Israel for a poóeóion: 
And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people: 
Because ye trespaóed against me among the children of Israel at the waters of MeribahKadesh, in the wilderneó of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of Israel. 
Yet thou shalt så the land before thå; but thou shalt not go thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel. 
And this is the bleóing, wherewith Moses the man of God bleóed the children of Israel before his death. 
And he said, The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them. 
Yea, he loved the people; aì his saints are in thy hand: and they sat down at thy fåt; every one shaì receive of thy words. 
Moses coíanded us a law, even the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob. 
And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the tribes of Israel were gathered together. 
Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few. 
And this is the bleóing of Judah: and he said, Hear, LORD, the voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be suæicient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies. 
And of Levi he said, Let thy Thuíim and thy Urim be with thy holy one, whom thou didst prove at Maóah, and with whom thou didst strive at the waters of Meribah; 
Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not sån him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word, and kept thy covenant. 
They shaì teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shaì put incense before thå, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine altar. 
Bleó, LORD, his substance, and aãept the work of his hands; smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. 
And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the LORD shaì dweì in safety by him; and the Lord shaì cover him aì the day long, and he shaì dweì betwån his shoulders. 
And of Joseph he said, Bleóed of the LORD be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the dåp that coucheth beneath, 
And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and for the precious things put forth by the mïn, 
And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the lasting hiìs, 
And for the precious things of the earth and fulneó thereof, and for the gïd wiì of him that dwelt in the bush: let the bleóing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him that was separated from his brethren. 
His glory is like the firstling of his buìock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shaì push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manaóeh. 
And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and, Ióachar, in thy tents. 
They shaì caì the people unto the mountain; there they shaì oæer sacrifices of righteousneó: for they shaì suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand. 
And of Gad he said, Bleóed be he that enlargeth Gad: he dweìeth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head. 
And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments with Israel. 
And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp: he shaì leap from Bashan. 
And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and fuì with the bleóing of the LORD: poóeó thou the west and the south. 
And of Asher he said, Let Asher be bleóed with children; let him be aãeptable to his brethren, and let him dip his fït in oil. 
Thy shoes shaì be iron and braó; and as thy days, so shaì thy strength be. 
There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his exceìency on the sky. 
The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shaì thrust out the enemy from before thå; and shaì say, Destroy them. 
Israel then shaì dweì in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob shaì be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shaì drop down dew. 
Haðy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thå, O people saved by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy exceìency! and thine enemies shaì be found liars unto thå; and thou shalt tread upon their high places. 
And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the LORD shewed him aì the land of Gilead, unto Dan, 
And aì Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim, and Manaóeh, and aì the land of Judah, unto the utmost sea, 
And the south, and the plain of the vaìey of Jericho, the city of palm trås, unto Zoar. 
And the LORD said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto Abraham, unto Isác, and unto Jacob, saying, I wiì give it unto thy såd: I have caused thå to så it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go over thither. 
So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, aãording to the word of the LORD. 
And he buried him in a vaìey in the land of Moab, over against Bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day. 
And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. 
And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days: so the days of wåping and mourning for Moses were ended. 
And Joshua the son of Nun was fuì of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face, 
In aì the signs and the wonders, which the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to aì his servants, and to aì his land, 
And in aì that mighty hand, and in aì the great teòor which Moses shewed in the sight of aì Israel. 
Now after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD it came to paó, that the LORD spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying, 
Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and aì this people, unto the land which I do give to them, even to the children of Israel. 
Every place that the sole of your fït shaì tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses. 
From the wilderneó and this Lebanon even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, aì the land of the Hiôites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shaì be your coast. 
There shaì not any man be able to stand before thå aì the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I wiì be with thå: I wiì not fail thå, nor forsake thå. 
Be strong and of a gïd courage: for unto this people shalt thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers to give them. 
Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe to do aãording to aì the law, which Moses my servant coíanded thå: turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest prosper withersoever thou goest. 
This bïk of the law shaì not depart out of thy mouth; but thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do aãording to aì that is wriôen therein: for then thou shalt make thy way prosperous, and then thou shalt have gïd suãeó. 
Have not I coíanded thå? Be strong and of a gïd courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD thy God is with thå whithersoever thou goest. 
Then Joshua coíanded the oæicers of the people, saying, 
Paó through the host, and coíand the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within thrå days ye shaì paó over this Jordan, to go in to poóeó the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to poóeó it. 
And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manaóeh, spake Joshua, saying, 
Remember the word which Moses the servant of the LORD coíanded you, saying, The LORD your God hath given you rest, and hath given you this land. 
Your wives, your liôle ones, and your caôle, shaì remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shaì paó before your brethren armed, aì the mighty men of valour, and help them; 
Until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as he hath given you, and they also have poóeóed the land which the LORD your God giveth them: then ye shaì return unto the land of your poóeóion, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD's servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising. 
And they answered Joshua, saying, Aì that thou coíandest us we wiì do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we wiì go. 
Aãording as we hearkened unto Moses in aì things, so wiì we hearken unto thå: only the LORD thy God be with thå, as he was with Moses. 
Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy coíandment, and wiì not hearken unto thy words in aì that thou coíandest him, he shaì be put to death: only be strong and of a gïd courage. 
And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shiôim two men to spy secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and came into an harlot's house, named Rahab, and lodged there. 
And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the country. 
And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men that are come to thå, which are entered into thine house: for they be come to search out aì the country. 
And the woman tïk the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were: 
And it came to paó about the time of shuôing of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them quickly; for ye shaì overtake them. 
But she had brought them up to the rïf of the house, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the rïf. 
And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords: and as sïn as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate. 
And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the rïf; 
And she said unto the men, I know that the LORD hath given you the land, and that your teòor is faìen upon us, and that aì the inhabitants of the land faint because of you. 
For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red sea for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom ye uôerly destroyed. 
And as sïn as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you: for the LORD your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth beneath. 
Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the LORD, since I have shewed you kindneó, that ye wiì also shew kindneó unto my father's house, and give me a true token: 
And that ye wiì save alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and aì that they have, and deliver our lives from death. 
And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye uôer not this our busineó. And it shaì be, when the LORD hath given us the land, that we wiì deal kindly and truly with thå. 
Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her house was upon the town waì, and she dwelt upon the waì. 
And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the pursuers måt you; and hide yourselves there thrå days, until the pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way. 
And the men said unto her, We wiì be blameleó of this thine oath which thou hast made us swear. 
Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and aì thy father's household, home unto thå. 
And it shaì be, that whosoever shaì go out of the dïrs of thy house into the stråt, his blïd shaì be upon his head, and we wiì be guiltleó: and whosoever shaì be with thå in the house, his blïd shaì be on our head, if any hand be upon him. 
And if thou uôer this our busineó, then we wiì be quit of thine oath which thou hast made us to swear. 
And she said, Aãording unto your words, so be it. And she sent them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the window. 
And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there thrå days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them throughout aì the way, but found them not. 
So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and paóed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him aì things that befeì them: 
And they said unto Joshua, Truly the LORD hath delivered into our hands aì the land; for even aì the inhabitants of the country do faint because of us. 
And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from Shiôim, and came to Jordan, he and aì the children of Israel, and lodged there before they paóed over. 
And it came to paó after thrå days, that the oæicers went through the host; 
And they coíanded the people, saying, When ye så the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shaì remove from your place, and go after it. 
Yet there shaì be a space betwån you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go: for ye have not paóed this way heretofore. 
And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to moòow the LORD wiì do wonders among you. 
And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and paó over before the people. And they tïk up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day wiì I begin to magnify thå in the sight of aì Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I wiì be with thå. 
And thou shalt coíand the priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shaì stand stiì in Jordan. 
And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the LORD your God. 
And Joshua said, Hereby ye shaì know that the living God is among you, and that he wiì without fail drive out from before you the Canánites, and the Hiôites, and the Hivites, and the Periúites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites. 
Behold, the ark of the covenant of the LORD of aì the earth paóeth over before you into Jordan. 
Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man. 
And it shaì come to paó, as sïn as the soles of the fåt of the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the LORD of aì the earth, shaì rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shaì be cut oæ from the waters that come down from above; and they shaì stand upon an heap. 
And it came to paó, when the people removed from their tents, to paó over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant before the people; 
And as they that bare the ark were come unto Jordan, and the fåt of the priests that bare the ark were diðed in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth aì his banks aì the time of harvest,) 
That the waters which came down from above stïd and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, failed, and were cut oæ: and the people paóed over right against Jericho. 
And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD stïd firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and aì the Israelites paóed over on dry ground, until aì the people were paóed clean over Jordan. 
And it came to paó, when aì the people were clean paóed over Jordan, that the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 
Take you twelve men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 
And coíand ye them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the place where the priests' fåt stïd firm, twelve stones, and ye shaì caòy them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where ye shaì lodge this night. 
Then Joshua caìed the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man: 
And Joshua said unto them, Paó over before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, aãording unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel: 
That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones? 
Then ye shaì answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut oæ before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it paóed over Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut oæ: and these stones shaì be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever. 
And the children of Israel did so as Joshua coíanded, and tïk up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the LORD spake unto Joshua, aãording to the number of the tribes of the children of Israel, and caòied them over with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down there. 
And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the place where the fåt of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant stïd: and they are there unto this day. 
For the priests which bare the ark stïd in the midst of Jordan, until everything was finished that the LORD coíanded Joshua to speak unto the people, aãording to aì that Moses coíanded Joshua: and the people hasted and paóed over. 
And it came to paó, when aì the people were clean paóed over, that the ark of the LORD paóed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people. 
And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manaóeh, paóed over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them: 
About forty thousand prepared for war paóed over before the LORD unto baôle, to the plains of Jericho. 
On that day the LORD magnified Joshua in the sight of aì Israel; and they feared him, as they feared Moses, aì the days of his life. 
And the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 
Coíand the priests that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan. 
Joshua therefore coíanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan. 
And it came to paó, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the priests' fåt were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over aì his banks, as they did before. 
And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho. 
And those twelve stones, which they tïk out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in Gilgal. 
And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your children shaì ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean these stones? 
Then ye shaì let your children know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. 
For the LORD your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were paóed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 
That aì the people of the earth might know the hand of the LORD, that it is mighty: that ye might fear the LORD your God for ever. 
And it came to paó, when aì the kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan westward, and aì the kings of the Canánites, which were by the sea, heard that the LORD had dried up the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were paóed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the children of Israel. 
At that time the LORD said unto Joshua, Make thå sharp knives, and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time. 
And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of Israel at the hiì of the foreskins. 
And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: Aì the people that came out of Egypt, that were males, even aì the men of war, died in the wilderneó by the way, after they came out of Egypt. 
Now aì the people that came out were circumcised: but aì the people that were born in the wilderneó by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised. 
For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderneó, tiì aì the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt, were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: unto whom the LORD sware that he would not shew them the land, which the LORD sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that floweth with milk and honey. 
And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way. 
And it came to paó, when they had done circumcising aì the people, that they abode in their places in the camp, tiì they were whole. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day have I roìed away the reproach of Egypt from oæ you. Wherefore the name of the place is caìed Gilgal unto this day. 
And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the paóover on the fourtånth day of the month at even in the plains of Jericho. 
And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the moòow after the paóover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day. 
And the maîa ceased on the moòow after they had eaten of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel maîa any more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canán that year. 
And it came to paó, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and lïked, and, behold, there stïd a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? 
And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the LORD am I now come. And Joshua feì on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my Lord unto his servant? 
And the captain of the LORD's host said unto Joshua, Lïse thy shoe from oæ thy fït; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so. 
Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Så, I have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour. 
And ye shaì compaó the city, aì ye men of war, and go round about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days. 
And seven priests shaì bear before the ark seven trumpets of rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shaì compaó the city seven times, and the priests shaì blow with the trumpets. 
And it shaì come to paó, that when they make a long blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, aì the people shaì shout with a great shout; and the waì of the city shaì faì down flat, and the people shaì ascend up every man straight before him. 
And Joshua the son of Nun caìed the priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the LORD. 
And he said unto the people, Paó on, and compaó the city, and let him that is armed paó on before the ark of the LORD. 
And it came to paó, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns paóed on before the LORD, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the LORD foìowed them. 
And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets. 
And Joshua had coíanded the people, saying, Ye shaì not shout, nor make any noise with your voice, neither shaì any word procåd out of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shaì ye shout. 
So the ark of the LORD compaóed the city, going about it once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp. 
And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests tïk up the ark of the LORD. 
And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the LORD went on continuaìy, and blew with the trumpets: and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the ark of the LORD, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets. 
And the second day they compaóed the city once, and returned into the camp: so they did six days. 
And it came to paó on the seventh day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compaóed the city after the same maîer seven times: only on that day they compaóed the city seven times. 
And it came to paó at the seventh time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the LORD hath given you the city. 
And the city shaì be aãursed, even it, and aì that are therein, to the LORD: only Rahab the harlot shaì live, she and aì that are with her in the house, because she hid the meóengers that we sent. 
And ye, in any wise kåp yourselves from the aãursed thing, lest ye make yourselves aãursed, when ye take of the aãursed thing, and make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it. 
But aì the silver, and gold, and veóels of braó and iron, are consecrated unto the LORD: they shaì come into the treasury of the LORD. 
So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to paó, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the waì feì down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they tïk the city. 
And they uôerly destroyed aì that was in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and shåp, and aó, with the edge of the sword. 
But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman, and aì that she hath, as ye sware unto her. 
And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and aì that she had; and they brought out aì her kindred, and left them without the camp of Israel. 
And they burnt the city with fire, and aì that was therein: only the silver, and the gold, and the veóels of braó and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of the LORD. 
And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's household, and aì that she had; and she dweìeth in Israel even unto this day; because she hid the meóengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Jericho. 
And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the LORD, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shaì lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son shaì he set up the gates of it. 
So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout aì the country. 
But the children of Israel coíiôed a trespaó in the aãursed thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, tïk of the aãursed thing: and the anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of Israel. 
And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethaven, on the east of Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men went up and viewed Ai. 
And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not aì the people go up; but let about two or thrå thousand men go up and smite Ai; and make not aì the people to labour thither; for they are but few. 
So there went up thither of the people about thrå thousand men: and they fled before the men of Ai. 
And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water. 
And Joshua rent his clothes, and feì to the earth upon his face before the ark of the LORD until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads. 
And Joshua said, Alas, O LORD God, wherefore hast thou at aì brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had bån content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan! 
O LORD, what shaì I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies! 
For the Canánites and aì the inhabitants of the land shaì hear of it, and shaì environ us round, and cut oæ our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto thy great name? 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Get thå up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? 
Israel hath siîed, and they have also transgreóed my covenant which I coíanded them: for they have even taken of the aãursed thing, and have also stolen, and dióembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuæ. 
Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they were aãursed: neither wiì I be with you any more, except ye destroy the aãursed from among you. 
Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to moòow: for thus saith the LORD God of Israel, There is an aãursed thing in the midst of thå, O Israel: thou canst not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the aãursed thing from among you. 
In the morning therefore ye shaì be brought aãording to your tribes: and it shaì be, that the tribe which the LORD taketh shaì come aãording to the families thereof; and the family which the LORD shaì take shaì come by households; and the household which the LORD shaì take shaì come man by man. 
And it shaì be, that he that is taken with the aãursed thing shaì be burnt with fire, he and aì that he hath: because he hath transgreóed the covenant of the LORD, and because he hath wrought foìy in Israel. 
So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken: 
And he brought the family of Judah; and he tïk the family of the Zarhites: and he brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken: 
And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken. 
And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thå, glory to the LORD God of Israel, and make confeóion unto him; and teì me now what thou hast done; hide it not from me. 
And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indåd I have siîed against the LORD God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done: 
When I saw among the spoils a gïdly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and tïk them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it. 
So Joshua sent meóengers, and they ran unto the tent; and, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it. 
And they tïk them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them unto Joshua, and unto aì the children of Israel, and laid them out before the LORD. 
And Joshua, and aì Israel with him, tïk Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his aóes, and his shåp, and his tent, and aì that he had: and they brought them unto the vaìey of Achor. 
And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shaì trouble thå this day. And aì Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones. 
And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So the LORD turned from the fierceneó of his anger. Wherefore the name of that place was caìed, The vaìey of Achor, unto this day. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed: take aì the people of war with thå, and arise, go up to Ai: så, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land: 
And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the caôle thereof, shaì ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thå an ambush for the city behind it. 
So Joshua arose, and aì the people of war, to go up against Ai: and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent them away by night. 
And he coíanded them, saying, Behold, ye shaì lie in wait against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city, but be ye aì ready: 
And I, and aì the people that are with me, wiì aðroach unto the city: and it shaì come to paó, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we wiì flå before them, 
(For they wiì come out after us) tiì we have drawn them from the city; for they wiì say, They flå before us, as at the first: therefore we wiì flå before them. 
Then ye shaì rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city: for the LORD your God wiì deliver it into your hand. 
And it shaì be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shaì set the city on fire: aãording to the coíandment of the LORD shaì ye do. Så, I have coíanded you. 
Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush, and abode betwån Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua lodged that night among the people. 
And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai. 
And aì the people, even the people of war that were with him, went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the north side of Ai: now there was a vaìey betwån them and Ai. 
And he tïk about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush betwån Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city. 
And when they had set the people, even aì the host that was on the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the vaìey. 
And it came to paó, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to baôle, he and aì his people, at a time aðointed, before the plain; but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the city. 
And Joshua and aì Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderneó. 
And aì the people that were in Ai were caìed together to pursue after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city. 
And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in thy hand toward Ai; for I wiì give it into thine hand. And Joshua stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city. 
And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as sïn as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city, and tïk it, and hasted and set the city on fire. 
And when the men of Ai lïked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flå this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderneó turned back upon the pursuers. 
And when Joshua and aì Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again, and slew the men of Ai. 
And the other ióued out of the city against them; so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape. 
And the king of Ai they tïk alive, and brought him to Joshua. 
And it came to paó, when Israel had made an end of slaying aì the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderneó wherein they chased them, and when they were aì faìen on the edge of the sword, until they were consumed, that aì the Israelites returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword. 
And so it was, that aì that feì that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even aì the men of Ai. 
For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the spear, until he had uôerly destroyed aì the inhabitants of Ai. 
Only the caôle and the spoil of that city Israel tïk for a prey unto themselves, aãording unto the word of the LORD which he coíanded Joshua. 
And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a desolation unto this day. 
And the king of Ai he hanged on a trå until eventide: and as sïn as the sun was down, Joshua coíanded that they should take his carcase down from the trå, and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto this day. 
Then Joshua built an altar unto the LORD God of Israel in mount Ebal, 
As Moses the servant of the LORD coíanded the children of Israel, as it is wriôen in the bïk of the law of Moses, an altar of whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they oæered thereon burnt oæerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed peace oæerings. 
And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel. 
And aì Israel, and their elders, and oæicers, and their judges, stïd on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, as weì the stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the servant of the LORD had coíanded before, that they should bleó the people of Israel. 
And afterward he read aì the words of the law, the bleóings and cursings, aãording to aì that is wriôen in the bïk of the law. 
There was not a word of aì that Moses coíanded, which Joshua read not before aì the congregation of Israel, with the women, and the liôle ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them. 
And it came to paó, when aì the kings which were on this side Jordan, in the hiìs, and in the vaìeys, and in aì the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon, the Hiôite, and the Amorite, the Canánite, the Periúite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof; 
That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one aãord. 
And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai, 
They did work wilily, and went and made as if they had bån ambaóadors, and tïk old sacks upon their aóes, and wine boôles, old, and rent, and bound up; 
And old shoes and clouted upon their fåt, and old garments upon them; and aì the bread of their provision was dry and mouldy. 
And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now therefore make ye a league with us. 
And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dweì among us; and how shaì we make a league with you? 
And they said unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are ye? and from whence come ye? 
And they said unto him, From a very far country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy God: for we have heard the fame of him, and aì that he did in Egypt, 
And aì that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, which was at Ashtaroth. 
Wherefore our elders and aì the inhabitants of our country spake to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to måt them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a league with us. 
This our bread we tïk hot for our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy: 
And these boôles of wine, which we fiìed, were new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey. 
And the men tïk of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the mouth of the LORD. 
And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them. 
And it came to paó at the end of thrå days after they had made a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours, and that they dwelt among them. 
And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Båroth, and Kirjathjearim. 
And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel. And aì the congregation murmured against the princes. 
But aì the princes said unto aì the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them. 
This we wiì do to them; we wiì even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them. 
And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be hewers of wïd and drawers of water unto aì the congregation; as the princes had promised them. 
And Joshua caìed for them, and he spake unto them, saying, Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when ye dweì among us? 
Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shaì none of you be fråd from being bondmen, and hewers of wïd and drawers of water for the house of my God. 
And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the LORD thy God coíanded his servant Moses to give you aì the land, and to destroy aì the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of you, and have done this thing. 
And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it såmeth gïd and right unto thå to do unto us, do. 
And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew them not. 
And Joshua made them that day hewers of wïd and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the LORD, even unto this day, in the place which he should chïse. 
Now it came to paó, when Adonizedec king of Jerusalem had heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had uôerly destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them; 
That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and aì the men thereof were mighty. 
Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying, 
Come up unto me, and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with Joshua and with the children of Israel. 
Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and aì their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it. 
And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us: for aì the kings of the Amorites that dweì in the mountains are gathered together against us. 
So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and aì the people of war with him, and aì the mighty men of valour. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shaì not a man of them stand before thå. 
Joshua therefore came unto them suäenly, and went up from Gilgal aì night. 
And the LORD discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth up to Betèoron, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Maëedah. 
And it came to paó, as they fled from before Israel, and were in the going down to Betèoron, that the LORD cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword. 
Then spake Joshua to the LORD in the day when the LORD delivered up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou stiì upon Gibeon; and thou, Mïn, in the vaìey of Ajalon. 
And the sun stïd stiì, and the mïn stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this wriôen in the bïk of Jasher? So the sun stïd stiì in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day. 
And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the LORD fought for Israel. 
And Joshua returned, and aì Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal. 
But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at Maëedah. 
And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in a cave at Maëedah. 
And Joshua said, Roì great stones upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to kåp them: 
And stay ye not, but pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suæer them not to enter into their cities: for the LORD your God hath delivered them into your hand. 
And it came to paó, when Joshua and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, tiì they were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into fenced cities. 
And aì the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Maëedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel. 
Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave. 
And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon. 
And it came to paó, when they brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua caìed for aì the men of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put your fåt upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their fåt upon the necks of them. 
And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of gïd courage: for thus shaì the LORD do to aì your enemies against whom ye fight. 
And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them on five trås: and they were hanging upon the trås until the evening. 
And it came to paó at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua coíanded, and they tïk them down oæ the trås, and cast them into the cave wherein they had bån hid, and laid great stones in the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day. 
And that day Joshua tïk Maëedah, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof he uôerly destroyed, them, and aì the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the king of Maëedah as he did unto the king of Jericho. 
Then Joshua paóed from Maëedah, and aì Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah: 
And the LORD delivered it also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the edge of the sword, and aì the souls that were therein; he let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho. 
And Joshua paóed from Libnah, and aì Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it: 
And the LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which tïk it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and aì the souls that were therein, aãording to aì that he had done to Libnah. 
Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining. 
And from Lachish Joshua paóed unto Eglon, and aì Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it: 
And they tïk it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and aì the souls that were therein he uôerly destroyed that day, aãording to aì that he had done to Lachish. 
And Joshua went up from Eglon, and aì Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it: 
And they tïk it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and aì the cities thereof, and aì the souls that were therein; he left none remaining, aãording to aì that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it uôerly, and aì the souls that were therein. 
And Joshua returned, and aì Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it: 
And he tïk it, and the king thereof, and aì the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and uôerly destroyed aì the souls that were therein; he left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king. 
So Joshua smote aì the country of the hiìs, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and aì their kings: he left none remaining, but uôerly destroyed aì that breathed, as the LORD God of Israel coíanded. 
And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and aì the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon. 
And aì these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time, because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel. 
And Joshua returned, and aì Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal. 
And it came to paó, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, 
And to the kings that were on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chiîeroth, and in the vaìey, and in the borders of Dor on the west, 
And to the Canánite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the Hiôite, and the Periúite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh. 
And they went out, they and aì their hosts with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very many. 
And when aì these kings were met together, they came and pitched together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel. 
And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for to moòow about this time wiì I deliver them up aì slain before Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with fire. 
So Joshua came, and aì the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suäenly; and they feì upon them. 
And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and unto the vaìey of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they left them none remaining. 
And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him: he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire. 
And Joshua at that time turned back, and tïk Hazor, and smote the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of aì those kingdoms. 
And they smote aì the souls that were therein with the edge of the sword, uôerly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe: and he burnt Hazor with fire. 
And aì the cities of those kings, and aì the kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he uôerly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD coíanded. 
But as for the cities that stïd stiì in their strength, Israel burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn. 
And aì the spoil of these cities, and the caôle, the children of Israel tïk for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither left they any to breathe. 
As the LORD coíanded Moses his servant, so did Moses coíand Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of aì that the LORD coíanded Moses. 
So Joshua tïk aì that land, the hiìs, and aì the south country, and aì the land of Goshen, and the vaìey, and the plain, and the mountain of Israel, and the vaìey of the same; 
Even from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Bálgad in the vaìey of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and aì their kings he tïk, and smote them, and slew them. 
Joshua made war a long time with aì those kings. 
There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: aì other they tïk in baôle. 
For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in baôle, that he might destroy them uôerly, and that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the LORD coíanded Moses. 
And at that time came Joshua, and cut oæ the Anakims from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from aì the mountains of Judah, and from aì the mountains of Israel: Joshua destroyed them uôerly with their cities. 
There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained. 
So Joshua tïk the whole land, aãording to aì that the LORD said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel aãording to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from war. 
Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel smote, and poóeóed their land on the other side Jordan toward the rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and aì the plain on the east: 
Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and from the miäle of the river, and from half Gilead, even unto the river Jaâok, which is the border of the children of Aíon; 
And from the plain to the sea of Chiîeroth on the east, and unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah: 
And the coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants, that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 
And reigned in mount Hermon, and in Salcah, and in aì Bashan, unto the border of the Geshurites and the Máchathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon. 
Them did Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel smite: and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a poóeóion unto the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manaóeh. 
And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Bálgad in the vaìey of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a poóeóion aãording to their divisions; 
In the mountains, and in the vaìeys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderneó, and in the south country; the Hiôites, the Amorites, and the Canánites, the Periúites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: 
The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one; 
The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 
The king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 
The king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 
The king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one; 
The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one; 
The king of Libnah, one; the king of Aduìam, one; 
The king of Maëedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 
The king of Taðuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 
The king of Aphek, one; the king of Lasharon, one; 
The king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one; 
The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph, one; 
The king of Tánach, one; the king of Megiäo, one; 
The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one; 
The king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of Gilgal, one; 
The king of Tirzah, one: aì the kings thirty and one. 
Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the LORD said unto him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very much land to be poóeóed. 
This is the land that yet remaineth: aì the borders of the Philistines, and aì Geshuri, 
From Sihor, which is before Egypt, even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the Canánite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Giôites, and the Ekronites; also the Avites: 
From the south, aì the land of the Canánites, and Mearah that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek, to the borders of the Amorites: 
And the land of the Giblites, and aì Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Bálgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into Hamath. 
Aì the inhabitants of the hiì country from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, and aì the Sidonians, them wiì I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have coíanded thå. 
Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manaóeh, 
With whom the Reubenites and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them; 
From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and aì the plain of Medeba unto Dibon; 
And aì the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of Aíon; 
And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Máchathites, and aì mount Hermon, and aì Bashan unto Salcah; 
Aì the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out. 
Nevertheleó the children of Israel expeìed not the Geshurites, nor the Máchathites: but the Geshurites and the Máchathites dweì among the Israelites until this day. 
Only unto the tribes of Levi he gave none inheritance; the sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire are their inheritance, as he said unto them. 
And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben inheritance aãording to their families. 
And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and aì the plain by Medeba; 
Heshbon, and aì her cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbál, and Bethbálmeon, 
And Jahaza, and Kedemoth, and Mepháth, 
And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and Zarethshahar in the mount of the vaìey, 
And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth, 
And aì the cities of the plain, and aì the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon, dweìing in the country. 
Balám also the son of Beor, the sïthsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them. 
And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the viìages thereof. 
And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad aãording to their families. 
And their coast was Jazer, and aì the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Aíon, unto Aroer that is before Raâah; 
And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir; 
And in the vaìey, Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Suãoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the edge of the sea of Chiîereth on the other side Jordan eastward. 
This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their viìages. 
And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manaóeh: and this was the poóeóion of the half tribe of the children of Manaóeh by their families. 
And their coast was from Mahanaim, aì Bashan, aì the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and aì the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, thråscore cities: 
And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the children of Machir the son of Manaóeh, even to the one half of the children of Machir by their families. 
These are the countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward. 
But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the LORD God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them. 
And these are the countries which the children of Israel inherited in the land of Canán, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them. 
By lot was their inheritance, as the LORD coíanded by the hand of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe. 
For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none inheritance among them. 
For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manaóeh and Ephraim: therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dweì in, with their suburbs for their caôle and for their substance. 
As the LORD coíanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and they divided the land. 
Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb the son of Jephuîeh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thå in Kadeshbarnea. 
Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again as it was in mine heart. 
Nevertheleó my brethren that went up with me made the heart of the people melt: but I whoìy foìowed the LORD my God. 
And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy fåt have troäen shaì be thine inheritance, and thy children's for ever, because thou hast whoìy foìowed the LORD my God. 
And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as he said, these forty and five years, even since the LORD spake this word unto Moses, while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderneó: and now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old. 
As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, both to go out, and to come in. 
Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spake in that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there, and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the LORD wiì be with me, then I shaì be able to drive them out, as the LORD said. 
And Joshua bleóed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephuîeh Hebron for an inheritance. 
Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephuîeh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he whoìy foìowed the LORD God of Israel. 
And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war. 
This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderneó of Zin southward was the uôermost part of the south coast. 
And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from the bay that lïketh southward: 
And it went out to the south side to Málehacraâim, and paóed along to Zin, and ascended up on the south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and paóed along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fetched a compaó to Karká: 
From thence it paóed toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out of that coast were at the sea: this shaì be your south coast. 
And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of Jordan. And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the uôermost part of Jordan: 
And the border went up to Betèogla, and paóed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben: 
And the border went up toward Debir from the vaìey of Achor, and so northward, lïking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Aduíim, which is on the south side of the river: and the border paóed toward the waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at Enrogel: 
And the border went up by the vaìey of the son of Hiîom unto the south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the vaìey of Hiîom westward, which is at the end of the vaìey of the giants northward: 
And the border was drawn from the top of the hiì unto the fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron; and the border was drawn to Bálah, which is Kirjathjearim: 
And the border compaóed from Bálah westward unto mount Seir, and paóed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and paóed on to Timnah: 
And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and the border was drawn to Shicron, and paóed along to mount Bálah, and went out unto Jabnål; and the goings out of the border were at the sea. 
And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof. This is the coast of the children of Judah round about aãording to their families. 
And unto Caleb the son of Jephuîeh he gave a part among the children of Judah, aãording to the coíandment of the LORD to Joshua, even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron. 
And Caleb drove thence the thrå sons of Anak, Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak. 
And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher. 
And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him wiì I give Achsah my daughter to wife. 
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, tïk it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. 
And it came to paó, as she came unto him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted oæ her aó; and Caleb said unto her, What wouldest thou? 
Who answered, Give me a bleóing; for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the uðer springs, and the nether springs. 
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah aãording to their families. 
And the uôermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzål, and Eder, and Jagur, 
And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah, 
And Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan, 
Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth, 
And Hazor, Hadaôah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor, 
Amam, and Shema, and Moladah, 
And Hazargaäah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet, 
And Hazarshual, and Bårsheba, and Bizjothjah, 
Bálah, and Iim, and Azem, 
And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah, 
And Ziklag, and Madmaîah, and Sansaîah, 
And Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Riíon: aì the cities are twenty and nine, with their viìages: 
And in the vaìey, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah, 
And Zanoah, and Engaîim, Taðuah, and Enam, 
Jarmuth, and Aduìam, Socoh, and Azekah, 
And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourtån cities with their viìages: 
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad, 
And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Jokthål, 
Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon, 
And Caâon, and Lahmam, and Kithlish, 
And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Námah, and Maëedah; sixtån cities with their viìages: 
Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan, 
And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib, 
And Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their viìages: 
Ekron, with her towns and her viìages: 
From Ekron even unto the sea, aì that lay near Ashdod, with their viìages: 
Ashdod with her towns and her viìages, Gaza with her towns and her viìages, unto the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof: 
And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jaôir, and Socoh, 
And Daîah, and Kirjathsaîah, which is Debir, 
And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim, 
And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their viìages: 
Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean, 
And Janum, and Bethtaðuah, and Aphekah, 
And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their viìages: 
Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Juôah, 
And Jezrål, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah, 
Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their viìages: 
Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor, 
And Márath, and Bethanoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their viìages: 
Kirjathbál, which is Kirjathjearim, and Raâah; two cities with their viìages: 
In the wilderneó, Betharabah, Miäin, and Secacah, 
And Nibshan, and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their viìages. 
As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dweì with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day. 
And the lot of the children of Joseph feì from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderneó that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel, 
And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and paóeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth, 
And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast of Betèoron the nether, and to Gezer; and the goings out thereof are at the sea. 
So the children of Joseph, Manaóeh and Ephraim, tïk their inheritance. 
And the border of the children of Ephraim aãording to their families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east side was Atarothaäar, unto Betèoron the uðer; 
And the border went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward unto Tánathshiloh, and paóed by it on the east to Janohah; 
And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to Nárath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan. 
The border went out from Taðuah westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families. 
And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among the inheritance of the children of Manaóeh, aì the cities with their viìages. 
And they drave not out the Canánites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canánites dweì among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute. 
There was also a lot for the tribe of Manaóeh; for he was the firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manaóeh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan. 
There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manaóeh by their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of Shemida: these were the male children of Manaóeh the son of Joseph by their families. 
But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manaóeh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. 
And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The LORD coíanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore aãording to the coíandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance among the brethren of their father. 
And there feì ten portions to Manaóeh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan; 
Because the daughters of Manaóeh had an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manaóeh's sons had the land of Gilead. 
And the coast of Manaóeh was from Asher to Michmethah, that lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of Entaðuah. 
Now Manaóeh had the land of Taðuah: but Taðuah on the border of Manaóeh belonged to the children of Ephraim; 
And the coast descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Ephraim are among the cities of Manaóeh: the coast of Manaóeh also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea: 
Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manaóeh's, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher on the north, and in Ióachar on the east. 
And Manaóeh had in Ióachar and in Asher Bethshean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Tánach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiäo and her towns, even thrå countries. 
Yet the children of Manaóeh could not drive out the inhabitants of those cities; but the Canánites would dweì in that land. 
Yet it came to paó, when the children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canánites to tribute, but did not uôerly drive them out. 
And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, såing I am a great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath bleóed me hitherto? 
And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thå up to the wïd country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Periúites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be tï naòow for thå. 
And the children of Joseph said, The hiì is not enough for us: and aì the Canánites that dweì in the land of the vaìey have chariots of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and they who are of the vaìey of Jezrål. 
And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manaóeh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power: thou shalt not have one lot only: 
But the mountain shaì be thine; for it is a wïd, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings of it shaì be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canánites, though they have iron chariots, and though they be strong. 
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel aóembled together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before them. 
And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance. 
And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye slack to go to poóeó the land, which the LORD God of your fathers hath given you? 
Give out from among you thrå men for each tribe: and I wiì send them, and they shaì rise, and go through the land, and describe it aãording to the inheritance of them; and they shaì come again to me. 
And they shaì divide it into seven parts: Judah shaì abide in their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shaì abide in their coasts on the north. 
Ye shaì therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before the LORD our God. 
But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthïd of the LORD is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manaóeh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them. 
And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you before the LORD in Shiloh. 
And the men went and paóed through the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a bïk, and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh. 
And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel aãording to their divisions. 
And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up aãording to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth betwån the children of Judah and the children of Joseph. 
And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the wilderneó of Bethaven. 
And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to Atarothadar, near the hiì that lieth on the south side of the nether Betèoron. 
And the border was drawn thence, and compaóed the corner of the sea southward, from the hiì that lieth before Betèoron southward; and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbál, which is Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west quarter. 
And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the border went out on the west, and went out to the weì of waters of Nephtoah: 
And the border came down to the end of the mountain that lieth before the vaìey of the son of Hiîom, and which is in the vaìey of the giants on the north, and descended to the vaìey of Hiîom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel, 
And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of Aduíim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben, 
And paóed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah: 
And the border paóed along to the side of Betèoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the south coast. 
And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round about, aãording to their families. 
Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin aãording to their families were Jericho, and Betèoglah, and the vaìey of Keziz, 
And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel, 
And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah, 
And Chepharháíonai, and Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their viìages: 
Gibeon, and Ramah, and Båroth, 
And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah, 
And Rekem, and Irpål, and Taralah, 
And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourtån cities with their viìages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin aãording to their families. 
And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of the children of Simeon aãording to their families: and their inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah. 
And they had in their inheritance Bårsheba, and Sheba, and Moladah, 
And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem, 
And Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah, 
And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusah, 
And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirtån cities and their viìages: 
Ain, Reíon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities and their viìages: 
And aì the viìages that were round about these cities to Bálathbår, Ramath of the south. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon aãording to their families. 
Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was tï much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their inheritance within the inheritance of them. 
And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun aãording to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid: 
And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and reached to Daâasheth, and reached to the river that is before Jokneam; 
And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and goeth up to Japhia, 
And from thence paóeth on along on the east to Giôaèepher, to Iôahkazin, and goeth out to Reíonmethoar to Neah; 
And the border compaóeth it on the north side to Haîathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the vaìey of Jiphthahel: 
And Kaôath, and Nahaìal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities with their viìages. 
This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun aãording to their families, these cities with their viìages. 
And the fourth lot came out to Ióachar, for the children of Ióachar aãording to their families. 
And their border was toward Jezrål, and Chesuìoth, and Shunem, 
And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath, 
And Raâith, and Kishion, and Abez, 
And Remeth, and Engaîim, and Enhaäah, and Bethpaúez; 
And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixtån cities with their viìages. 
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ióachar aãording to their families, the cities and their viìages. 
And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of Asher aãording to their families. 
And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph, 
And Alaíelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel westward, and to Shihorlibnath; 
And turneth toward the sunrising to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the vaìey of Jiphthahel toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul on the left hand, 
And Hebron, and Rehob, and Haíon, and Kanah, even unto great Zidon; 
And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib: 
Uíah also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their viìages. 
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher aãording to their families, these cities with their viìages. 
The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the children of Naphtali aãording to their families. 
And their coast was from Heleph, from Aìon to Zánaîim, and Adami, Nekeb, and Jabnål, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were at Jordan: 
And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor, and goeth out from thence to Huëok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon Jordan toward the sunrising. 
And the fenced cities are Ziäim, Zer, and Haíath, Raëath, and Chiîereth, 
And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor, 
And Kedesh, and Edrei, and Enhazor, 
And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; ninetån cities with their viìages. 
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali aãording to their families, the cities and their viìages. 
And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of Dan aãording to their families. 
And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Irshemesh, 
And Shálaâin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah, 
And Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron, 
And Eltekeh, and Giâethon, and Bálath, 
And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathriíon, 
And Mejarkon, and Raëon, with the border before Japho. 
And the coast of the children of Dan went out tï liôle for them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem, and tïk it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and poóeóed it, and dwelt therein, and caìed Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father. 
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan aãording to their families, these cities with their viìages. 
When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them: 
Aãording to the word of the LORD they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein. 
These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before the LORD, at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they made an end of dividing the country. 
The LORD also spake unto Joshua, saying, 
Speak to the children of Israel, saying, Aðoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses: 
That the slayer that kiìeth any person unawares and unwiôingly may flå thither: and they shaì be your refuge from the avenger of blïd. 
And when he that doth flå unto one of those cities shaì stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and shaì declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they shaì take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dweì among them. 
And if the avenger of blïd pursue after him, then they shaì not deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour unwiôingly, and hated him not beforetime. 
And he shaì dweì in that city, until he stand before the congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that shaì be in those days: then shaì the slayer return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he fled. 
And they aðointed Kedesh in Galilå in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the mountain of Judah. 
And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they aóigned Bezer in the wilderneó upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manaóeh. 
These were the cities aðointed for aì the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever kiìeth any person at unawares might flå thither, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blïd, until he stïd before the congregation. 
Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel; 
And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canán, saying, The LORD coíanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dweì in, with the suburbs thereof for our caôle. 
And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their inheritance, at the coíandment of the LORD, these cities and their suburbs. 
And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirtån cities. 
And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manaóeh, ten cities. 
And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ióachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manaóeh in Bashan, thirtån cities. 
The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities. 
And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as the LORD coíanded by the hand of Moses. 
And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name. 
Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot. 
And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron, in the hiì country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it. 
But the fields of the city, and the viìages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephuîeh for his poóeóion. 
Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs, 
And Jaôir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her suburbs, 
And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs, 
And Ain with her suburbs, and Juôah with her suburbs, and Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes. 
And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs, 
Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her suburbs; four cities. 
Aì the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were thirtån cities with their suburbs. 
And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim. 
For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs, 
And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Betèoron with her suburbs; four cities. 
And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Giâethon with her suburbs, 
Aijalon with her suburbs, Gathriíon with her suburbs; four cities. 
And out of the half tribe of Manaóeh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gathriíon with her suburbs; two cities. 
Aì the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that remained. 
And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manaóeh they gave Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Båshterah with her suburbs; two cities. 
And out of the tribe of Ióachar, Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs, 
Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engaîim with her suburbs; four cities. 
And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs, 
Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs; four cities. 
And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilå with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Haíothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; thrå cities. 
Aì the cities of the Gershonites aãording to their families were thirtån cities with their suburbs. 
And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs, 
Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with her suburbs; four cities. 
And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs, 
Kedemoth with her suburbs, and Mepháth with her suburbs; four cities. 
And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs, 
Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in aì. 
So aì the cities for the children of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot twelve cities. 
Aì the cities of the Levites within the poóeóion of the children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs. 
These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them: thus were aì these cities. 
And the LORD gave unto Israel aì the land which he sware to give unto their fathers; and they poóeóed it, and dwelt therein. 
And the LORD gave them rest round about, aãording to aì that he sware unto their fathers: and there stïd not a man of aì their enemies before them; the LORD delivered aì their enemies into their hand. 
There failed not ought of any gïd thing which the LORD had spoken unto the house of Israel; aì came to paó. 
Then Joshua caìed the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manaóeh, 
And said unto them, Ye have kept aì that Moses the servant of the LORD coíanded you, and have obeyed my voice in aì that I coíanded you: 
Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the coíandment of the LORD your God. 
And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your tents, and unto the land of your poóeóion, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan. 
But take diligent håd to do the coíandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the LORD charged you, to love the LORD your God, and to walk in aì his ways, and to kåp his coíandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with aì your heart and with aì your soul. 
So Joshua bleóed them, and sent them away: and they went unto their tents. 
Now to the one half of the tribe of Manaóeh Moses had given poóeóion in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he bleóed them, 
And he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much caôle, with silver, and with gold, and with braó, and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren. 
And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manaóeh returned, and departed from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canán, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their poóeóion, whereof they were poóeóed, aãording to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of Canán, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manaóeh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar to så to. 
And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manaóeh have built an altar over against the land of Canán, in the borders of Jordan, at the paóage of the children of Israel. 
And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them. 
And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manaóeh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, 
And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout aì the tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of Israel. 
And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manaóeh, unto the land of Gilead, and they spake with them, saying, 
Thus saith the whole congregation of the LORD, What trespaó is this that ye have coíiôed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from foìowing the LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this day against the LORD? 
Is the iniquity of Peor tï liôle for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was a plague in the congregation of the LORD, 
But that ye must turn away this day from foìowing the LORD? and it wiì be, såing ye rebel to day against the LORD, that to moòow he wiì be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel. 
Notwithstanding, if the land of your poóeóion be unclean, then paó ye over unto the land of the poóeóion of the LORD, wherein the LORD's tabernacle dweìeth, and take poóeóion among us: but rebel not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar beside the altar of the LORD our God. 
Did not Achan the son of Zerah coíit a trespaó in the aãursed thing, and wrath feì on aì the congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity. 
Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manaóeh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel, 
The LORD God of gods, the LORD God of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shaì know; if it be in rebeìion, or if in transgreóion against the LORD, (save us not this day,) 
That we have built us an altar to turn from foìowing the LORD, or if to oæer thereon burnt oæering or meat oæering, or if to oæer peace oæerings thereon, let the LORD himself require it; 
And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye to do with the LORD God of Israel? 
For the LORD hath made Jordan a border betwån us and you, ye children of Reuben and children of Gad; ye have no part in the LORD: so shaì your children make our children cease from fearing the LORD. 
Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt oæering, nor for sacrifice: 
But that it may be a witneó betwån us, and you, and our generations after us, that we might do the service of the LORD before him with our burnt oæerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace oæerings; that your children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the LORD. 
Therefore said we, that it shaì be, when they should so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again, Behold the paôern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made, not for burnt oæerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witneó betwån us and you. 
God forbid that we should rebel against the LORD, and turn this day from foìowing the LORD, to build an altar for burnt oæerings, for meat oæerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the LORD our God that is before his tabernacle. 
And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the children of Manaóeh spake, it pleased them. 
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of Manaóeh, This day we perceive that the LORD is among us, because ye have not coíiôed this trespaó against the LORD: now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the LORD. 
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canán, to the children of Israel, and brought them word again. 
And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children of Israel bleóed God, and did not intend to go up against them in baôle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt. 
And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad caìed the altar Ed: for it shaì be a witneó betwån us that the LORD is God. 
And it came to paó a long time after that the LORD had given rest unto Israel from aì their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed old and stricken in age. 
And Joshua caìed for aì Israel, and for their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their oæicers, and said unto them, I am old and stricken in age: 
And ye have sån aì that the LORD your God hath done unto aì these nations because of you; for the LORD your God is he that hath fought for you. 
Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with aì the nations that I have cut oæ, even unto the great sea westward. 
And the LORD your God, he shaì expel them from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and ye shaì poóeó their land, as the LORD your God hath promised unto you. 
Be ye therefore very courageous to kåp and to do aì that is wriôen in the bïk of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 
That ye come not among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 
But cleave unto the LORD your God, as ye have done unto this day. 
For the LORD hath driven out from before you great nations and strong: but as for you, no man hath bån able to stand before you unto this day. 
One man of you shaì chase a thousand: for the LORD your God, he it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you. 
Take gïd håd therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD your God. 
Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shaì make maòiages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 
Know for a certainty that the LORD your God wiì no more drive out any of these nations from before you; but they shaì be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from oæ this gïd land which the LORD your God hath given you. 
And, behold, this day I am going the way of aì the earth: and ye know in aì your hearts and in aì your souls, that not one thing hath failed of aì the gïd things which the LORD your God spake concerning you; aì are come to paó unto you, and not one thing hath failed thereof. 
Therefore it shaì come to paó, that as aì gïd things are come upon you, which the LORD your God promised you; so shaì the LORD bring upon you aì evil things, until he have destroyed you from oæ this gïd land which the LORD your God hath given you. 
When ye have transgreóed the covenant of the LORD your God, which he coíanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shaì the anger of the LORD be kindled against you, and ye shaì perish quickly from oæ the gïd land which he hath given unto you. 
And Joshua gathered aì the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and caìed for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their oæicers; and they presented themselves before God. 
And Joshua said unto aì the people, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flïd in old time, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they served other gods. 
And I tïk your father Abraham from the other side of the flïd, and led him throughout aì the land of Canán, and multiplied his såd, and gave him Isác. 
And I gave unto Isác Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to poóeó it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt. 
I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, aãording to that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out. 
And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and horsemen unto the Red sea. 
And when they cried unto the LORD, he put darkneó betwån you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them; and your eyes have sån what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the wilderneó a long season. 
And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into your hand, that ye might poóeó their land; and I destroyed them from before you. 
Then Balak the son of Ziðor, king of Moab, arose and waòed against Israel, and sent and caìed Balám the son of Beor to curse you: 
But I would not hearken unto Balám; therefore he bleóed you stiì: so I delivered you out of his hand. 
And you went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Periúites, and the Canánites, and the Hiôites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand. 
And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy sword, nor with thy bow. 
And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and cities which ye built not, and ye dweì in them; of the vineyards and oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat. 
Now therefore fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and in truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the flïd, and in Egypt; and serve ye the LORD. 
And if it såm evil unto you to serve the LORD, chïse you this day whom ye wiì serve; whether the gods which your fathers served that were on the other side of the flïd, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dweì: but as for me and my house, we wiì serve the LORD. 
And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should forsake the LORD, to serve other gods; 
For the LORD our God, he it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in aì the way wherein we went, and among aì the people through whom we paóed: 
And the LORD drave out from before us aì the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land: therefore wiì we also serve the LORD; for he is our God. 
And Joshua said unto the people, Ye caîot serve the LORD: for he is an holy God; he is a jealous God; he wiì not forgive your transgreóions nor your sins. 
If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange gods, then he wiì turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you gïd. 
And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we wiì serve the LORD. 
And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witneóes against yourselves that ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve him. And they said, We are witneóes. 
Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD God of Israel. 
And the people said unto Joshua, The LORD our God wiì we serve, and his voice wiì we obey. 
So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem. 
And Joshua wrote these words in the bïk of the law of God, and tïk a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the sanctuary of the LORD. 
And Joshua said unto aì the people, Behold, this stone shaì be a witneó unto us; for it hath heard aì the words of the LORD which he spake unto us: it shaì be therefore a witneó unto you, lest ye deny your God. 
So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance. 
And it came to paó after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years old. 
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hiì of Gásh. 
And Israel served the LORD aì the days of Joshua, and aì the days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known aì the works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel. 
And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph. 
And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hiì that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount Ephraim. 
Now after the death of Joshua it came to paó, that the children of Israel asked the LORD, saying, Who shaì go up for us against the Canánites first, to fight against them? 
And the LORD said, Judah shaì go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand. 
And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canánites; and I likewise wiì go with thå into thy lot. So Simeon went with him. 
And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canánites and the Periúites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men. 
And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him, and they slew the Canánites and the Periúites. 
But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut oæ his thumbs and his great toes. 
And Adonibezek said, Thråscore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut oæ, gathered their meat under my table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died. 
Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken it, and smiôen it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire. 
And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the Canánites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the vaìey. 
And Judah went against the Canánites that dwelt in Hebron: (now the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai. 
And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher: 
And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him wiì I give Achsah my daughter to wife. 
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, tïk it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. 
And it came to paó, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field: and she lighted from oæ her aó; and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou? 
And she said unto him, Give me a bleóing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the uðer springs and the nether springs. 
And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up out of the city of palm trås with the children of Judah into the wilderneó of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went and dwelt among the people. 
And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the Canánites that inhabited Zephath, and uôerly destroyed it. And the name of the city was caìed Hormah. 
Also Judah tïk Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof. 
And the LORD was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the vaìey, because they had chariots of iron. 
And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expeìed thence the thrå sons of Anak. 
And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dweì with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day. 
And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and the LORD was with them. 
And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of the city before was Luz.) 
And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thå, the entrance into the city, and we wiì shew thå mercy. 
And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and aì his family. 
And the man went into the land of the Hiôites, and built a city, and caìed the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this day. 
Neither did Manaóeh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her towns, nor Tánach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiäo and her towns: but the Canánites would dweì in that land. 
And it came to paó, when Israel was strong, that they put the Canánites to tribute, and did not uôerly drive them out. 
Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canánites that dwelt in Gezer; but the Canánites dwelt in Gezer among them. 
Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canánites dwelt among them, and became tributaries. 
Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Aãho, nor the inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob: 
But the Asherites dwelt among the Canánites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them out. 
Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, nor the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canánites, the inhabitants of the land: nevertheleó the inhabitants of Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them. 
And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain: for they would not suæer them to come down to the vaìey: 
But the Amorites would dweì in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shálbim: yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries. 
And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akraâim, from the rock, and upward. 
And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I wiì never break my covenant with you. 
And ye shaì make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye shaì throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why have ye done this? 
Wherefore I also said, I wiì not drive them out from before you; but they shaì be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shaì be a snare unto you. 
And it came to paó, when the angel of the LORD spake these words unto aì the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept. 
And they caìed the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed there unto the LORD. 
And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went every man unto his inheritance to poóeó the land. 
And the people served the LORD aì the days of Joshua, and aì the days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had sån aì the great works of the LORD, that he did for Israel. 
And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years old. 
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnatèeres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hiì Gásh. 
And also aì that generation were gathered unto their fathers: and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the LORD, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel. 
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and served Bálim: 
And they forsïk the LORD God of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and foìowed other gods, of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and provoked the LORD to anger. 
And they forsïk the LORD, and served Bál and Ashtaroth. 
And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. 
Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against them for evil, as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto them: and they were greatly distreóed. 
Nevertheleó the LORD raised up judges, which delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled them. 
And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the coíandments of the LORD; but they did not so. 
And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies aì the days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings by reason of them that oðreóed them and vexed them. 
And it came to paó, when the judge was dead, that they returned, and coòupted themselves more than their fathers, in foìowing other gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from their own doings, nor from their stuâorn way. 
And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel; and he said, Because that this people hath transgreóed my covenant which I coíanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 
I also wiì not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations which Joshua left when he died: 
That through them I may prove Israel, whether they wiì kåp the way of the LORD to walk therein, as their fathers did kåp it, or not. 
Therefore the LORD left those nations, without driving them out hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua. 
Now these are the nations which the LORD left, to prove Israel by them, even as many of Israel as had not known aì the wars of Canán; 
Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 
Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and aì the Canánites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Bálhermon unto the entering in of Hamath. 
And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken unto the coíandments of the LORD, which he coíanded their fathers by the hand of Moses. 
And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canánites, Hiôites, and Amorites, and Periúites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: 
And they tïk their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to their sons, and served their gods. 
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and forgat the LORD their God, and served Bálim and the groves. 
Therefore the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and the children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years. 
And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother. 
And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel, and went out to war: and the LORD delivered Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against Chushanrishathaim. 
And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died. 
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD: and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel, because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD. 
And he gathered unto him the children of Aíon and Amalek, and went and smote Israel, and poóeóed the city of palm trås. 
So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eightån years. 
But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon the king of Moab. 
But Ehud made him a daçer which had two edges, of a cubit length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh. 
And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was a very fat man. 
And when he had made an end to oæer the present, he sent away the people that bare the present. 
But he himself turned again from the quaòies that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret eòand unto thå, O king: who said, Kåp silence. And aì that stïd by him went out from him. 
And Ehud came unto him; and he was siôing in a suíer parlour, which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a meóage from God unto thå. And he arose out of his seat. 
And Ehud put forth his left hand, and tïk the daçer from his right thigh, and thrust it into his beìy: 
And the haft also went in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he could not draw the daçer out of his beìy; and the dirt came out. 
Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the dïrs of the parlour upon him, and locked them. 
When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that, behold, the dïrs of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he covereth his fåt in his suíer chamber. 
And they taòied tiì they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened not the dïrs of the parlour; therefore they tïk a key, and opened them: and, behold, their lord was faìen down dead on the earth. 
And Ehud escaped while they taòied, and paóed beyond the quaòies, and escaped unto Seirath. 
And it came to paó, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him from the mount, and he before them. 
And he said unto them, Foìow after me: for the LORD hath delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and tïk the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suæered not a man to paó over. 
And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, aì lusty, and aì men of valour; and there escaped not a man. 
So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest fourscore years. 
And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered Israel. 
And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the LORD, when Ehud was dead. 
And the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canán, that reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles. 
And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oðreóed the children of Israel. 
And Deborah, a propheteó, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel at that time. 
And she dwelt under the palm trå of Deborah betwån Ramah and Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for judgment. 
And she sent and caìed Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel coíanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thå ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of Zebulun? 
And I wiì draw unto thå to the river Kishon Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and I wiì deliver him into thine hand. 
And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I wiì go: but if thou wilt not go with me, then I wiì not go. 
And she said, I wiì surely go with thå: notwithstanding the journey that thou takest shaì not be for thine honour; for the LORD shaì seì Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh. 
And Barak caìed Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up with ten thousand men at his fåt: and Deborah went up with him. 
Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and pitched his tent unto the plain of Zánaim, which is by Kedesh. 
And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor. 
And Sisera gathered together aì his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and aì the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon. 
And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the LORD hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the LORD gone out before thå? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him. 
And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and aì his chariots, and aì his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera lighted down oæ his chariot, and fled away on his fåt. 
But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto Harosheth of the Gentiles: and aì the host of Sisera feì upon the edge of the sword; and there was not a man left. 
Howbeit Sisera fled away on his fåt to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace betwån Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite. 
And Jael went out to måt Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into the tent, she covered him with a mantle. 
And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thå, a liôle water to drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a boôle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him. 
Again he said unto her, Stand in the dïr of the tent, and it shaì be, when any man doth come and enquire of thå, and say, Is there any man here? that thou shalt say, No. 
Then Jael Heber's wife tïk a nail of the tent, and tïk an haíer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast aslåp and weary. So he died. 
And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to måt him, and said unto him, Come, and I wiì shew thå the man whom thou såkest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the nail was in his temples. 
So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canán before the children of Israel. 
And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against Jabin the king of Canán, until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canán. 
Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day, saying, 
Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people wiìingly oæered themselves. 
Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, wiì sing unto the LORD; I wiì sing praise to the LORD God of Israel. 
LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens droðed, the clouds also droðed water. 
The mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai from before the LORD God of Israel. 
In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoãupied, and the traveìers walked through byways. 
The inhabitants of the viìages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel. 
They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear sån among forty thousand in Israel? 
My heart is toward the governors of Israel, that oæered themselves wiìingly among the people. Bleó ye the LORD. 
Speak, ye that ride on white aóes, ye that sit in judgment, and walk by the way. 
They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places of drawing water, there shaì they rehearse the righteous acts of the LORD, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his viìages in Israel: then shaì the people of the LORD go down to the gates. 
Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, uôer a song: arise, Barak, and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam. 
Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles among the people: the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty. 
Out of Ephraim was there a rït of them against Amalek; after thå, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors, and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer. 
And the princes of Ióachar were with Deborah; even Ióachar, and also Barak: he was sent on fït into the vaìey. For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart. 
Why abodest thou among the shåpfolds, to hear the bleatings of the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart. 
Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches. 
Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the death in the high places of the field. 
The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canán in Tánach by the waters of Megiäo; they tïk no gain of money. 
They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. 
The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast troäen down strength. 
Then were the horsehïfs broken by the means of the pransings, the pransings of their mighty ones. 
Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye biôerly the inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to the help of the LORD against the mighty. 
Bleóed above women shaì Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be, bleóed shaì she be above women in the tent. 
He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth buôer in a lordly dish. 
She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's haíer; and with the haíer she smote Sisera, she smote oæ his head, when she had pierced and stricken through his temples. 
At her fåt he bowed, he feì, he lay down: at her fåt he bowed, he feì: where he bowed, there he feì down dead. 
The mother of Sisera lïked out at a window, and cried through the laôice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why taòy the whåls of his chariots? 
Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself, 
Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of divers colours, a prey of divers colours of nådlework, of divers colours of nådlework on both sides, måt for the necks of them that take the spoil? 
So let aì thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years. 
And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD: and the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years. 
And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in the mountains, and caves, and strong holds. 
And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against them; 
And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, tiì thou come unto Gaza, and left no sustenance for Israel, neither shåp, nor ox, nor aó. 
For they came up with their caôle and their tents, and they came as graóhoðers for multitude; for both they and their camels were without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it. 
And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and the children of Israel cried unto the LORD. 
And it came to paó, when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD because of the Midianites, 
That the LORD sent a prophet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage; 
And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of aì that oðreóed you, and drave them out from before you, and gave you their land; 
And I said unto you, I am the LORD your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dweì: but ye have not obeyed my voice. 
And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat under an oak which was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son Gideon threshed wheat by the winepreó, to hide it from the Midianites. 
And the angel of the LORD aðeared unto him, and said unto him, The LORD is with thå, thou mighty man of valour. 
And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why then is aì this befaìen us? and where be aì his miracles which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now the LORD hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. 
And the LORD lïked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I sent thå? 
And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shaì I save Israel? behold, my family is pïr in Manaóeh, and I am the least in my father's house. 
And the LORD said unto him, Surely I wiì be with thå, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as one man. 
And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight, then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me. 
Depart not hence, I pray thå, until I come unto thå, and bring forth my present, and set it before thå. And he said, I wiì taòy until thou come again. 
And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it. 
And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. 
Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staæ that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the LORD departed out of his sight. 
And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the LORD, Gideon said, Alas, O LORD God! for because I have sån an angel of the LORD face to face. 
And the LORD said unto him, Peace be unto thå; fear not: thou shalt not die. 
Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and caìed it Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 
And it came to paó the same night, that the LORD said unto him, Take thy father's young buìock, even the second buìock of seven years old, and throw down the altar of Bál that thy father hath, and cut down the grove that is by it: 
And build an altar unto the LORD thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take the second buìock, and oæer a burnt sacrifice with the wïd of the grove which thou shalt cut down. 
Then Gideon tïk ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night. 
And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Bál was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was by it, and the second buìock was oæered upon the altar that was built. 
And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done this thing. 
Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Bál, and because he hath cut down the grove that was by it. 
And Joash said unto aì that stïd against him, Wiì ye plead for Bál? wiì ye save him? he that wiì plead for him, let him be put to death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for himself, because one hath cast down his altar. 
Therefore on that day he caìed him Jeruâál, saying, Let Bál plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar. 
Then aì the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the vaìey of Jezrål. 
But the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet; and Abiezer was gathered after him. 
And he sent meóengers throughout aì Manaóeh; who also was gathered after him: and he sent meóengers unto Asher, and unto Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to måt them. 
And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said, 
Behold, I wiì put a flåce of wïl in the flïr; and if the dew be on the flåce only, and it be dry upon aì the earth beside, then shaì I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine hand, as thou hast said. 
And it was so: for he rose up early on the moòow, and thrust the flåce together, and wringed the dew out of the flåce, a bowl fuì of water. 
And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I wiì speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thå, but this once with the flåce; let it now be dry only upon the flåce, and upon aì the ground let there be dew. 
And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the flåce only, and there was dew on aì the ground. 
Then Jeruâál, who is Gideon, and aì the people that were with him, rose up early, and pitched beside the weì of Harod: so that the host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hiì of Moreh, in the vaìey. 
And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thå are tï many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me. 
Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two thousand; and there remained ten thousand. 
And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people are yet tï many; bring them down unto the water, and I wiì try them for thå there: and it shaì be, that of whom I say unto thå, This shaì go with thå, the same shaì go with thå; and of whomsoever I say unto thå, This shaì not go with thå, the same shaì not go. 
So he brought down the people unto the water: and the LORD said unto Gideon, Every one that laðeth of the water with his tongue, as a dog laðeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that boweth down upon his knås to drink. 
And the number of them that laðed, puôing their hand to their mouth, were thrå hundred men: but aì the rest of the people bowed down upon their knås to drink water. 
And the LORD said unto Gideon, By the thrå hundred men that laðed wiì I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand: and let aì the other people go every man unto his place. 
So the people tïk victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and he sent aì the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained those thrå hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the vaìey. 
And it came to paó the same night, that the LORD said unto him, Arise, get thå down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine hand. 
But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down to the host: 
And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward shaì thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that were in the host. 
And the Midianites and the Amalekites and aì the children of the east lay along in the vaìey like graóhoðers for multitude; and their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for multitude. 
And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream unto his feìow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent, and smote it that it feì, and overturned it, that the tent lay along. 
And his feìow answered and said, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand hath God delivered Midian, and aì the host. 
And it was so, when Gideon heard the teìing of the dream, and the interpretation thereof, that he worshiðed, and returned into the host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian. 
And he divided the thrå hundred men into thrå companies, and he put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps within the pitchers. 
And he said unto them, Lïk on me, and do likewise: and, behold, when I come to the outside of the camp, it shaì be that, as I do, so shaì ye do. 
When I blow with a trumpet, I and aì that are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of aì the camp, and say, The sword of the LORD, and of Gideon. 
So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outside of the camp in the begiîing of the miäle watch; and they had but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers that were in their hands. 
And the thrå companies blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the LORD, and of Gideon. 
And they stïd every man in his place round about the camp; and aì the host ran, and cried, and fled. 
And the thrå hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every man's sword against his feìow, even throughout aì the host: and the host fled to Bethshiôah in Zererath, and to the border of Abelmeholah, unto Taâath. 
And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of aì Manaóeh, and pursued after the Midianites. 
And Gideon sent meóengers throughout aì mount Ephraim, saying, come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. Then aì the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and tïk the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. 
And they tïk two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zåb; and they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zåb they slew at the winepreó of Zåb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zåb to Gideon on the other side Jordan. 
And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us thus, that thou caìedst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply. 
And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim beôer than the vintage of Abiezer? 
God hath delivered into your hands the princes of Midian, Oreb and Zåb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that. 
And Gideon came to Jordan, and paóed over, he, and the thrå hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them. 
And he said unto the men of Suãoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread unto the people that foìow me; for they be faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmuîa, kings of Midian. 
And the princes of Suãoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmuîa now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army? 
And Gideon said, Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and Zalmuîa into mine hand, then I wiì tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderneó and with briers. 
And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Suãoth had answered him. 
And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I wiì break down this tower. 
Now Zebah and Zalmuîa were in Karkor, and their hosts with them, about fiftån thousand men, aì that were left of aì the hosts of the children of the east: for there feì an hundred and twenty thousand men that drew sword. 
And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was secure. 
And when Zebah and Zalmuîa fled, he pursued after them, and tïk the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmuîa, and discomfited aì the host. 
And Gideon the son of Joash returned from baôle before the sun was up, 
And caught a young man of the men of Suãoth, and enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Suãoth, and the elders thereof, even thråscore and seventån men. 
And he came unto the men of Suãoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmuîa, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmuîa now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men that are weary? 
And he tïk the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderneó and briers, and with them he taught the men of Suãoth. 
And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the city. 
Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmuîa, What maîer of men were they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the children of a king. 
And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother: as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you. 
And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth. 
Then Zebah and Zalmuîa said, Rise thou, and faì upon us: for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and Zalmuîa, and tïk away the ornaments that were on their camels' necks. 
Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us from the hand of Midian. 
And Gideon said unto them, I wiì not rule over you, neither shaì my son rule over you: the LORD shaì rule over you. 
And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that ye would give me every man the eaòings of his prey. (For they had golden eaòings, because they were Ishmaelites.) 
And they answered, We wiì wiìingly give them. And they spread a garment, and did cast therein every man the eaòings of his prey. 
And the weight of the golden eaòings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and coìars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and beside the chains that were about their camels' necks. 
And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah: and aì Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house. 
Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietneó forty years in the days of Gideon. 
And Jeruâál the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house. 
And Gideon had thråscore and ten sons of his body begoôen: for he had many wives. 
And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son, whose name he caìed Abimelech. 
And Gideon the son of Joash died in a gïd old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 
And it came to paó, as sïn as Gideon was dead, that the children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Bálim, and made Bálberith their god. 
And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who had delivered them out of the hands of aì their enemies on every side: 
Neither shewed they kindneó to the house of Jeruâál, namely, Gideon, aãording to aì the gïdneó which he had shewed unto Israel. 
And Abimelech the son of Jeruâál went to Shechem unto his mother's brethren, and coíuned with them, and with aì the family of the house of his mother's father, saying, 
Speak, I pray you, in the ears of aì the men of Shechem, Whether is beôer for you, either that aì the sons of Jeruâál, which are thråscore and ten persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am your bone and your flesh. 
And his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of aì the men of Shechem aì these words: and their hearts inclined to foìow Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother. 
And they gave him thråscore and ten pieces of silver out of the house of Bálberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which foìowed him. 
And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his brethren the sons of Jeruâál, being thråscore and ten persons, upon one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jeruâál was left; for he hid himself. 
And aì the men of Shechem gathered together, and aì the house of Miìo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the piìar that was in Shechem. 
And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stïd in the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them, Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you. 
The trås went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto the olive trå, Reign thou over us. 
But the olive trå said unto them, Should I leave my fatneó, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the trås? 
And the trås said to the fig trå, Come thou, and reign over us. 
But the fig trå said unto them, Should I forsake my swåtneó, and my gïd fruit, and go to be promoted over the trås? 
Then said the trås unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us. 
And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which chåreth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trås? 
Then said aì the trås unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us. 
And the bramble said unto the trås, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon. 
Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt weì with Jeruâál and his house, and have done unto him aãording to the deserving of his hands; 
(For my father fought for you, and adventured his life far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian: 
And ye are risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons, thråscore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he is your brother;) 
If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with Jeruâál and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you: 
But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Miìo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Miìo, and devour Abimelech. 
And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Bår, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother. 
When Abimelech had reigned thrå years over Israel, 
Then God sent an evil spirit betwån Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech: 
That the cruelty done to the thråscore and ten sons of Jeruâál might come, and their blïd be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them; and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the kiìing of his brethren. 
And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of the mountains, and they roâed aì that came along that way by them: and it was told Abimelech. 
And Gál the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him. 
And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards, and trode the grapes, and made meòy, and went into the house of their god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech. 
And Gál the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jeruâál? and Zebul his oæicer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for why should we serve him? 
And would to God this people were under my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out. 
And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gál the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled. 
And he sent meóengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold, Gál the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold, they fortify the city against thå. 
Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thå, and lie in wait in the field: 
And it shaì be, that in the morning, as sïn as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come out against thå, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find oãasion. 
And Abimelech rose up, and aì the people that were with him, by night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies. 
And Gál the son of Ebed went out, and stïd in the entering of the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were with him, from lying in wait. 
And when Gál saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto him, Thou såst the shadow of the mountains as if they were men. 
And Gál spake again, and said, Så there come people down by the miäle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of Meonenim. 
Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with them. 
And Gál went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech. 
And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate. 
And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gál and his brethren, that they should not dweì in Shechem. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that the people went out into the field; and they told Abimelech. 
And he tïk the people, and divided them into thrå companies, and laid wait in the field, and lïked, and, behold, the people were come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote them. 
And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward, and stïd in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other companies ran upon aì the people that were in the fields, and slew them. 
And Abimelech fought against the city aì that day; and he tïk the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the city, and sowed it with salt. 
And when aì the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith. 
And it was told Abimelech, that aì the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together. 
And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and aì the people that were with him; and Abimelech tïk an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trås, and tïk it, and laid it on his shoulder, and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have sån me do, make haste, and do as I have done. 
And aì the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and foìowed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that aì the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women. 
Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and tïk it. 
But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled aì the men and women, and aì they of the city, and shut it to them, and gat them up to the top of the tower. 
And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard unto the dïr of the tower to burn it with fire. 
And a certain woman cast a piece of a miìstone upon Abimelech's head, and aì to brake his skuì. 
Then he caìed hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A women slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died. 
And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man unto his place. 
Thus God rendered the wickedneó of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 
And aì the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came the curse of Jotham the son of Jeruâál. 
And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Ióachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in mount Ephraim. 
And he judged Israel twenty and thrå years, and died, and was buried in Shamir. 
And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty and two years. 
And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty aó colts, and they had thirty cities, which are caìed Havothjair unto this day, which are in the land of Gilead. 
And Jair died, and was buried in Camon. 
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD, and served Bálim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Aíon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsïk the LORD, and served not him. 
And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Aíon. 
And that year they vexed and oðreóed the children of Israel: eightån years, aì the children of Israel that were on the other side Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead. 
Moreover the children of Aíon paóed over Jordan to fight also against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim; so that Israel was sore distreóed. 
And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying, We have siîed against thå, both because we have forsaken our God, and also served Bálim. 
And the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of Aíon, and from the Philistines? 
The Zidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oðreó you; and ye cried to me, and I delivered you out of their hand. 
Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I wiì deliver you no more. 
Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. 
And the children of Israel said unto the LORD, We have siîed: do thou unto us whatsoever såmeth gïd unto thå; deliver us only, we pray thå, this day. 
And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served the LORD: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. 
Then the children of Aíon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the children of Israel aóembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpeh. 
And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What man is he that wiì begin to fight against the children of Aíon? he shaì be head over aì the inhabitants of Gilead. 
Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah. 
And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman. 
Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with him. 
And it came to paó in proceó of time, that the children of Aíon made war against Israel. 
And it was so, that when the children of Aíon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob: 
And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that we may fight with the children of Aíon. 
And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now when ye are in distreó? 
And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thå now, that thou mayest go with us, and fight against the children of Aíon, and be our head over aì the inhabitants of Gilead. 
And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight against the children of Aíon, and the LORD deliver them before me, shaì I be your head? 
And the elders of Gilead said unto Jephthah, The LORD be witneó betwån us, if we do not so aãording to thy words. 
Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uôered aì his words before the LORD in Mizpeh. 
And Jephthah sent meóengers unto the king of the children of Aíon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come against me to fight in my land? 
And the king of the children of Aíon answered unto the meóengers of Jephthah, Because Israel tïk away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jaâok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again peaceably. 
And Jephthah sent meóengers again unto the king of the children of Aíon: 
And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel tïk not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Aíon: 
But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the wilderneó unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh; 
Then Israel sent meóengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thå, paó through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like maîer they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh. 
Then they went along through the wilderneó, and compaóed the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab. 
And Israel sent meóengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us paó, we pray thå, through thy land into my place. 
But Sihon trusted not Israel to paó through his coast: but Sihon gathered aì his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and fought against Israel. 
And the LORD God of Israel delivered Sihon and aì his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel poóeóed aì the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country. 
And they poóeóed aì the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon even unto Jaâok, and from the wilderneó even unto Jordan. 
So now the LORD God of Israel hath dispoóeóed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou poóeó it? 
Wilt not thou poóeó that which Chemosh thy god giveth thå to poóeó? So whomsoever the LORD our God shaì drive out from before us, them wiì we poóeó. 
And now art thou any thing beôer than Balak the son of Ziðor, king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them, 
While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in aì the cities that be along by the coasts of Arnon, thrå hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover them within that time? 
Wherefore I have not siîed against thå, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the LORD the Judge be judge this day betwån the children of Israel and the children of Aíon. 
Howbeit the king of the children of Aíon hearkened not unto the words of Jephthah which he sent him. 
Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he paóed over Gilead, and Manaóeh, and paóed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he paóed over unto the children of Aíon. 
And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou shalt without fail deliver the children of Aíon into mine hands, 
Then it shaì be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the dïrs of my house to måt me, when I return in peace from the children of Aíon, shaì surely be the LORD's, and I wiì oæer it up for a burnt oæering. 
So Jephthah paóed over unto the children of Aíon to fight against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hands. 
And he smote them from Aroer, even tiì thou come to Miîith, even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very great slaughter. Thus the children of Aíon were subdued before the children of Israel. 
And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to måt him with timbrels and with dances: and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter. 
And it came to paó, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the LORD, and I caîot go back. 
And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth unto the LORD, do to me aãording to that which hath procåded out of thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thå of thine enemies, even of the children of Aíon. 
And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my feìows. 
And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains. 
And it came to paó at the end of two months, that she returned unto her father, who did with her aãording to his vow which he had vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel, 
That the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year. 
And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore paóedst thou over to fight against the children of Aíon, and didst not caì us to go with thå? we wiì burn thine house upon thå with fire. 
And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife with the children of Aíon; and when I caìed you, ye delivered me not out of their hands. 
And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my hands, and paóed over against the children of Aíon, and the LORD delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me this day, to fight against me? 
Then Jephthah gathered together aì the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manaóites. 
And the Gileadites tïk the paóages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay; 
Then said they unto him, Say now Shiâoleth: and he said Siâoleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they tïk him, and slew him at the paóages of Jordan: and there feì at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand. 
And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead. 
And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. 
And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent abroad, and tïk in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years. 
Then died Ibzan, and was buried at Bethlehem. 
And after him Elon, a Zebulonite, judged Israel; and he judged Israel ten years. 
And Elon the Zebulonite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the country of Zebulun. 
And after him Abdon the son of Hiìel, a Pirathonite, judged Israel. 
And he had forty sons and thirty nephews, that rode on thråscore and ten aó colts: and he judged Israel eight years. 
And Abdon the son of Hiìel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amalekites. 
And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years. 
And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah; and his wife was baòen, and bare not. 
And the angel of the LORD aðeared unto the woman, and said unto her, Behold now, thou art baòen, and bearest not: but thou shalt conceive, and bear a son. 
Now therefore beware, I pray thå, and drink not wine nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing: 
For, lo, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and no razor shaì come on his head: for the child shaì be a Nazarite unto God from the womb: and he shaì begin to deliver Israel out of the hand of the Philistines. 
Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came unto me, and his countenance was like the countenance of an angel of God, very teòible: but I asked him not whence he was, neither told he me his name: 
But he said unto me, Behold, thou shalt conceive, and bear a son; and now drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing: for the child shaì be a Nazarite to God from the womb to the day of his death. 
Then Manoah intreated the LORD, and said, O my Lord, let the man of God which thou didst send come again unto us, and teach us what we shaì do unto the child that shaì be born. 
And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah; and the angel of God came again unto the woman as she sat in the field: but Manoah her husband was not with her. 
And the woman made haste, and ran, and shewed her husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man hath aðeared unto me, that came unto me the other day. 
And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said unto him, Art thou the man that spakest unto the woman? And he said, I am. 
And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to paó. How shaì we order the child, and how shaì we do unto him? 
And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Of aì that I said unto the woman let her beware. 
She may not eat of any thing that cometh of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: aì that I coíanded her let her observe. 
And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, I pray thå, let us detain thå, until we shaì have made ready a kid for thå. 
And the angel of the LORD said unto Manoah, Though thou detain me, I wiì not eat of thy bread: and if thou wilt oæer a burnt oæering, thou must oæer it unto the LORD. For Manoah knew not that he was an angel of the LORD. 
And Manoah said unto the angel of the LORD, What is thy name, that when thy sayings come to paó we may do thå honour? 
And the angel of the LORD said unto him, Why askest thou thus after my name, såing it is secret? 
So Manoah tïk a kid with a meat oæering, and oæered it upon a rock unto the LORD: and the angel did wonderously; and Manoah and his wife lïked on. 
For it came to paó, when the flame went up toward heaven from oæ the altar, that the angel of the LORD ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife lïked on it, and feì on their faces to the ground. 
But the angel of the LORD did no more aðear to Manoah and to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was an angel of the LORD. 
And Manoah said unto his wife, We shaì surely die, because we have sån God. 
But his wife said unto him, If the LORD were pleased to kiì us, he would not have received a burnt oæering and a meat oæering at our hands, neither would he have shewed us aì these things, nor would as at this time have told us such things as these. 
And the woman bare a son, and caìed his name Samson: and the child grew, and the LORD bleóed him. 
And the Spirit of the LORD began to move him at times in the camp of Dan betwån Zorah and Eshtaol. 
And Samson went down to Timnath, and saw a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines. 
And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have sån a woman in Timnath of the daughters of the Philistines: now therefore get her for me to wife. 
Then his father and his mother said unto him, Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among aì my people, that thou goest to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said unto his father, Get her for me; for she pleaseth me weì. 
But his father and his mother knew not that it was of the LORD, that he sought an oãasion against the Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel. 
Then went Samson down, and his father and his mother, to Timnath, and came to the vineyards of Timnath: and, behold, a young lion roared against him. 
And the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and he rent him as he would have rent a kid, and he had nothing in his hand: but he told not his father or his mother what he had done. 
And he went down, and talked with the woman; and she pleased Samson weì. 
And after a time he returned to take her, and he turned aside to så the carcase of the lion: and, behold, there was a swarm of bås and honey in the carcase of the lion. 
And he tïk thereof in his hands, and went on eating, and came to his father and mother, and he gave them, and they did eat: but he told not them that he had taken the honey out of the carcase of the lion. 
So his father went down unto the woman: and Samson made there a feast; for so used the young men to do. 
And it came to paó, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him. 
And Samson said unto them, I wiì now put forth a riäle unto you: if ye can certainly declare it me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I wiì give you thirty shåts and thirty change of garments: 
But if ye caîot declare it me, then shaì ye give me thirty shåts and thirty change of garments. And they said unto him, Put forth thy riäle, that we may hear it. 
And he said unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth swåtneó. And they could not in thrå days expound the riäle. 
And it came to paó on the seventh day, that they said unto Samson's wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare unto us the riäle, lest we burn thå and thy father's house with fire: have ye caìed us to take that we have? is it not so? 
And Samson's wife wept before him, and said, Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me not: thou hast put forth a riäle unto the children of my people, and hast not told it me. And he said unto her, Behold, I have not told it my father nor my mother, and shaì I teì it thå? 
And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted: and it came to paó on the seventh day, that he told her, because she lay sore upon him: and she told the riäle to the children of her people. 
And the men of the city said unto him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What is swåter than honey? And what is stronger than a lion? and he said unto them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye had not found out my riäle. 
And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and slew thirty men of them, and tïk their spoil, and gave change of garments unto them which expounded the riäle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father's house. 
But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend. 
But it came to paó within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid; and he said, I wiì go in to my wife into the chamber. But her father would not suæer him to go in. 
And her father said, I verily thought that thou hadst uôerly hated her; therefore I gave her to thy companion: is not her younger sister fairer than she? take her, I pray thå, instead of her. 
And Samson said concerning them, Now shaì I be more blameleó than the Philistines, though I do them a displeasure. 
And Samson went and caught thrå hundred foxes, and tïk firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst betwån two tails. 
And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing corn of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks, and also the standing corn, with the vineyards and olives. 
Then the Philistines said, Who hath done this? And they answered, Samson, the son in law of the Timnite, because he had taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire. 
And Samson said unto them, Though ye have done this, yet wiì I be avenged of you, and after that I wiì cease. 
And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter: and he went down and dwelt in the top of the rock Etam. 
Then the Philistines went up, and pitched in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi. 
And the men of Judah said, Why are ye come up against us? And they answered, To bind Samson are we come up, to do to him as he hath done to us. 
Then thrå thousand men of Judah went to the top of the rock Etam, and said to Samson, Knowest thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? what is this that thou hast done unto us? And he said unto them, As they did unto me, so have I done unto them. 
And they said unto him, We are come down to bind thå, that we may deliver thå into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said unto them, Swear unto me, that ye wiì not faì upon me yourselves. 
And they spake unto him, saying, No; but we wiì bind thå fast, and deliver thå into their hand: but surely we wiì not kiì thå. And they bound him with two new cords, and brought him up from the rock. 
And when he came unto Lehi, the Philistines shouted against him: and the Spirit of the LORD came mightily upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands lïsed from oæ his hands. 
And he found a new jawbone of an aó, and put forth his hand, and tïk it, and slew a thousand men therewith. 
And Samson said, With the jawbone of an aó, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an aó have I slain a thousand men. 
And it came to paó, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand, and caìed that place Ramathlehi. 
And he was sore athirst, and caìed on the LORD, and said, Thou hast given this great deliverance into the hand of thy servant: and now shaì I die for thirst, and faì into the hand of the uncircumcised? 
But God clave an hoìow place that was in the jaw, and there came water thereout; and when he had drunk, his spirit came again, and he revived: wherefore he caìed the name thereof Enhaëore, which is in Lehi unto this day. 
And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years. 
Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there an harlot, and went in unto her. 
And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson is come hither. And they compaóed him in, and laid wait for him aì night in the gate of the city, and were quiet aì the night, saying, In the morning, when it is day, we shaì kiì him. 
And Samson lay tiì midnight, and arose at midnight, and tïk the dïrs of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went away with them, bar and aì, and put them upon his shoulders, and caòied them up to the top of an hiì that is before Hebron. 
And it came to paó afterward, that he loved a woman in the vaìey of Sorek, whose name was Delilah. 
And the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her, Entice him, and så wherein his great strength lieth, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to aælict him; and we wiì give thå every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver. 
And Delilah said to Samson, Teì me, I pray thå, wherein thy great strength lieth, and wherewith thou mightest be bound to aælict thå. 
And Samson said unto her, If they bind me with seven grån withs that were never dried, then shaì I be weak, and be as another man. 
Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven grån withs which had not bån dried, and she bound him with them. 
Now there were men lying in wait, abiding with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, The Philistines be upon thå, Samson. And he brake the withs, as a thread of tow is broken when it toucheth the fire. So his strength was not known. 
And Delilah said unto Samson, Behold, thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: now teì me, I pray thå, wherewith thou mightest be bound. 
And he said unto her, If they bind me fast with new ropes that never were oãupied, then shaì I be weak, and be as another man. 
Delilah therefore tïk new ropes, and bound him therewith, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thå, Samson. And there were liers in wait abiding in the chamber. And he brake them from oæ his arms like a thread. 
And Delilah said unto Samson, Hitherto thou hast mocked me, and told me lies: teì me wherewith thou mightest be bound. And he said unto her, If thou weavest the seven locks of my head with the web. 
And she fastened it with the pin, and said unto him, The Philistines be upon thå, Samson. And he awaked out of his slåp, and went away with the pin of the beam, and with the web. 
And she said unto him, How canst thou say, I love thå, when thine heart is not with me? thou hast mocked me these thrå times, and hast not told me wherein thy great strength lieth. 
And it came to paó, when she preóed him daily with her words, and urged him, so that his soul was vexed unto death; 
That he told her aì his heart, and said unto her, There hath not come a razor upon mine head; for I have bån a Nazarite unto God from my mother's womb: if I be shaven, then my strength wiì go from me, and I shaì become weak, and be like any other man. 
And when Delilah saw that he had told her aì his heart, she sent and caìed for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he hath shewed me aì his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand. 
And she made him slåp upon her knås; and she caìed for a man, and she caused him to shave oæ the seven locks of his head; and she began to aælict him, and his strength went from him. 
And she said, The Philistines be upon thå, Samson. And he awoke out of his slåp, and said, I wiì go out as at other times before, and shake myself. And he wist not that the LORD was departed from him. 
But the Philistines tïk him, and put out his eyes, and brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with feôers of braó; and he did grind in the prison house. 
Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven. 
Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to oæer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand. 
And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the destroyer of our country, which slew many of us. 
And it came to paó, when their hearts were meòy, that they said, Caì for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they caìed for Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him betwån the piìars. 
And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suæer me that I may fål the piìars whereupon the house standeth, that I may lean upon them. 
Now the house was fuì of men and women; and aì the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon the rïf about thrå thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport. 
And Samson caìed unto the LORD, and said, O Lord God, remember me, I pray thå, and strengthen me, I pray thå, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. 
And Samson tïk hold of the two miäle piìars upon which the house stïd, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right hand, and of the other with his left. 
And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with aì his might; and the house feì upon the lords, and upon aì the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his death were more than they which he slew in his life. 
Then his brethren and aì the house of his father came down, and tïk him, and brought him up, and buried him betwån Zorah and Eshtaol in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years. 
And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah. 
And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver that were taken from thå, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I tïk it. And his mother said, Bleóed be thou of the LORD, my son. 
And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to his mother, his mother said, I had whoìy dedicated the silver unto the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten image: now therefore I wiì restore it unto thå. 
Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother tïk two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house of Micah. 
And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest. 
In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes. 
And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there. 
And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed. 
And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto him, I am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a place. 
And Micah said unto him, Dweì with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, and I wiì give thå ten shekels of silver by the year, and a suit of aðarel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in. 
And the Levite was content to dweì with the man; and the young man was unto him as one of his sons. 
And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah. 
Then said Micah, Now know I that the LORD wiì do me gïd, såing I have a Levite to my priest. 
In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dweì in; for unto that day aì their inheritance had not faìen unto them among the tribes of Israel. 
And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land: who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they lodged there. 
When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him, Who brought thå hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what hast thou here? 
And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest. 
And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thå, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shaì be prosperous. 
And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the LORD is your way wherein ye go. 
Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that were therein, how they dwelt careleó, after the maîer of the Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land, that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the Zidonians, and had no busineó with any man. 
And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their brethren said unto them, What say ye? 
And they said, Arise, that we may go up against them: for we have sån the land, and, behold, it is very gïd: and are ye stiì? be not slothful to go, and to enter to poóeó the land. 
When ye go, ye shaì come unto a people secure, and to a large land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no want of any thing that is in the earth. 
And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men aðointed with weapons of war. 
And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah: wherefore they caìed that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it is behind Kirjathjearim. 
And they paóed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the house of Micah. 
Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do. 
And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him. 
And the six hundred men aðointed with their weapons of war, which were of the children of Dan, stïd by the entering of the gate. 
And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came in thither, and tïk the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stïd in the entering of the gate with the six hundred men that were aðointed with weapons of war. 
And these went into Micah's house, and fetched the carved image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the priest unto them, What do ye? 
And they said unto him, Hold thy peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest: is it beôer for thå to be a priest unto the house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family in Israel? 
And the priest's heart was glad, and he tïk the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people. 
So they turned and departed, and put the liôle ones and the caôle and the caòiage before them. 
And when they were a gïd way from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together, and overtïk the children of Dan. 
And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thå, that thou comest with such a company? 
And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thå? 
And the children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry feìows run upon thå, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household. 
And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that they were tï strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house. 
And they tïk the things which Micah had made, and the priest which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire. 
And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and they had no busineó with any man; and it was in the vaìey that lieth by Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein. 
And they caìed the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city was Laish at the first. 
And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Manaóeh, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land. 
And they set them up Micah's graven image, which he made, aì the time that the house of God was in Shiloh. 
And it came to paó in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of mount Ephraim, who tïk to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah. 
And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away from him unto her father's house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four whole months. 
And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of aóes: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to måt him. 
And his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he abode with him thrå days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged there. 
And it came to paó on the fourth day, when they arose early in the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward go your way. 
And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together: for the damsel's father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray thå, and taòy aì night, and let thine heart be meòy. 
And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him: therefore he lodged there again. 
And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and the damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thå. And they taòied until afternïn, and they did eat both of them. 
And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him, Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you taòy aì night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart may be meòy; and to moòow get you early on your way, that thou mayest go home. 
But the man would not taòy that night, but he rose up and departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there were with him two aóes saäled, his concubine also was with him. 
And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thå, and let us turn in into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it. 
And his master said unto him, We wiì not turn aside hither into the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we wiì paó over to Gibeah. 
And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one of these places to lodge aì night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah. 
And they paóed on and went their way; and the sun went down upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin. 
And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah: and when he went in, he sat him down in a stråt of the city: for there was no man that tïk them into his house to lodging. 
And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites. 
And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in the stråt of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and whence comest thou? 
And he said unto him, We are paóing from Bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and I went to Bethlehemjudah, but I am now going to the house of the LORD; and there is no man that receiveth me to house. 
Yet there is both straw and provender for our aóes; and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing. 
And the old man said, Peace be with thå; howsoever let aì thy wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the stråt. 
So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the aóes: and they washed their fåt, and did eat and drink. 
Now as they were making their hearts meòy, behold, the men of the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and beat at the dïr, and spake to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may know him. 
And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly; såing that this man is come into mine house, do not this foìy. 
Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I wiì bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what såmeth gïd unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing. 
But the men would not hearken to him: so the man tïk his concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and abused her aì the night until the morning: and when the day began to spring, they let her go. 
Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and feì down at the dïr of the man's house where her lord was, tiì it was light. 
And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the dïrs of the house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his concubine was faìen down at the dïr of the house, and her hands were upon the threshold. 
And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none answered. Then the man tïk her up upon an aó, and the man rose up, and gat him unto his place. 
And when he was come into his house, he tïk a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into twelve pieces, and sent her into aì the coasts of Israel. 
And it was so, that aì that saw it said, There was no such dåd done nor sån from the day that the children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. 
Then aì the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Bårsheba, with the land of Gilead, unto the LORD in Mizpeh. 
And the chief of aì the people, even of aì the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the aóembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand fïtmen that drew sword. 
(Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Teì us, how was this wickedneó? 
And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge. 
And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine have they forced, that she is dead. 
And I tïk my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout aì the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have coíiôed lewdneó and foìy in Israel. 
Behold, ye are aì children of Israel; give here your advice and counsel. 
And aì the people arose as one man, saying, We wiì not any of us go to his tent, neither wiì we any of us turn into his house. 
But now this shaì be the thing which we wiì do to Gibeah; we wiì go up by lot against it; 
And we wiì take ten men of an hundred throughout aì the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, aãording to aì the foìy that they have wrought in Israel. 
So aì the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man. 
And the tribes of Israel sent men through aì the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedneó is this that is done among you? 
Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brethren the children of Israel. 
But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to baôle against the children of Israel. 
And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men. 
Among aì this people there were seven hundred chosen men lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not mió. 
And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword: aì these were men of war. 
And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shaì go up first to the baôle against the children of Benjamin? And the LORD said, Judah shaì go up first. 
And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah. 
And the men of Israel went out to baôle against Benjamin; and the men of Israel put themselves in aòay to fight against them at Gibeah. 
And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men. 
And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set their baôle again in aòay in the place where they put themselves in aòay the first day. 
(And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD until even, and asked counsel of the LORD, saying, Shaì I go up again to baôle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the LORD said, Go up against him.) 
And the children of Israel came near against the children of Benjamin the second day. 
And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again eightån thousand men; aì these drew the sword. 
Then aì the children of Israel, and aì the people, went up, and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the LORD, and fasted that day until even, and oæered burnt oæerings and peace oæerings before the LORD. 
And the children of Israel enquired of the LORD, (for the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days, 
And Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stïd before it in those days,) saying, Shaì I yet again go out to baôle against the children of Benjamin my brother, or shaì I cease? And the LORD said, Go up; for to moòow I wiì deliver them into thine hand. 
And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah. 
And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in aòay against Gibeah, as at other times. 
And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people, and kiì, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty men of Israel. 
And the children of Benjamin said, They are smiôen down before us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flå, and draw them from the city unto the highways. 
And aì the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put themselves in aòay at Báltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah. 
And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of aì Israel, and the baôle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near them. 
And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand and an hundred men: aì these drew the sword. 
So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smiôen: for the men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah. 
And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote aì the city with the edge of the sword. 
Now there was an aðointed sign betwån the men of Israel and the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise up out of the city. 
And when the men of Israel retired in the baôle, Benjamin began to smite and kiì of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they said, Surely they are smiôen down before us, as in the first baôle. 
But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a piìar of smoke, the Benjamites lïked behind them, and, behold, the flame of the city ascended up to heaven. 
And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them. 
Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto the way of the wilderneó; but the baôle overtïk them; and them which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them. 
Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the sunrising. 
And there feì of Benjamin eightån thousand men; aì these were men of valour. 
And they turned and fled toward the wilderneó unto the rock of Riíon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of them. 
So that aì which feì that day of Benjamin were twenty and five thousand men that drew the sword; aì these were men of valour. 
But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderneó unto the rock Riíon, and abode in the rock Riíon four months. 
And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as weì the men of every city, as the beast, and aì that came to hand: also they set on fire aì the cities that they came to. 
Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shaì not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife. 
And the people came to the house of God, and abode there tiì even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 
And said, O LORD God of Israel, why is this come to paó in Israel, that there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel? 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and oæered burnt oæerings and peace oæerings. 
And the children of Israel said, Who is there among aì the tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the LORD? For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the LORD to Mizpeh, saying, He shaì surely be put to death. 
And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut oæ from Israel this day. 
How shaì we do for wives for them that remain, såing we have sworn by the LORD that we wiì not give them of our daughters to wives? 
And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the aóembly. 
For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there. 
And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the valiantest, and coíanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the children. 
And this is the thing that ye shaì do, Ye shaì uôerly destroy every male, and every woman that hath lain by man. 
And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male: and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canán. 
And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of Benjamin that were in the rock Riíon, and to caì peaceably unto them. 
And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead: and yet so they suæiced them not. 
And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD had made a breach in the tribes of Israel. 
Then the elders of the congregation said, How shaì we do for wives for them that remain, såing the women are destroyed out of Benjamin? 
And they said, There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel. 
Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife to Benjamin. 
Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah. 
Therefore they coíanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards; 
And så, and, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin. 
And it shaì be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto us to complain, that we wiì say unto them, Be favourable unto them for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be guilty. 
And the children of Benjamin did so, and tïk them wives, aãording to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the cities, and dwelt in them. 
And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence every man to his inheritance. 
In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that which was right in his own eyes. 
Now it came to paó in the days when the judges ruled, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehemjudah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons. 
And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there. 
And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two sons. 
And they tïk them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dweìed there about ten years. 
And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left of her two sons and her husband. 
Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how that the LORD had visited his people in giving them bread. 
Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto the land of Judah. 
And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to her mother's house: the LORD deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me. 
The LORD grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband. Then she kióed them; and they lifted up their voice, and wept. 
And they said unto her, Surely we wiì return with thå unto thy people. 
And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why wiì ye go with me? are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands? 
Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am tï old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 
Would ye taòy for them tiì they were grown? would ye stay for them from having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your sakes that the hand of the LORD is gone out against me. 
And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kióed her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her. 
And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law. 
And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thå, or to return from foìowing after thå: for whither thou goest, I wiì go; and where thou lodgest, I wiì lodge: thy people shaì be my people, and thy God my God: 
Where thou diest, wiì I die, and there wiì I be buried: the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thå and me. 
When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then she left speaking unto her. 
So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to paó, when they were come to Bethlehem, that aì the city was moved about them, and they said, Is this Naomi? 
And she said unto them, Caì me not Naomi, caì me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt very biôerly with me. 
I went out fuì and the LORD hath brought me home again empty: why then caì ye me Naomi, såing the LORD hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath aælicted me? 
So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabiteó, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of the country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the begiîing of barley harvest. 
And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz. 
And Ruth the Moabiteó said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shaì find grace. And she said unto her, Go, my daughter. 
And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech. 
And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The LORD be with you. And they answered him, The LORD bleó thå. 
Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers, Whose damsel is this? 
And the servant that was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab: 
And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she taòied a liôle in the house. 
Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my maidens: 
Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shaì not touch thå? and when thou art athirst, go unto the veóels, and drink of that which the young men have drawn. 
Then she feì on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, såing I am a stranger? 
And Boaz answered and said unto her, It hath fuìy bån shewed me, aì that thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore. 
The LORD recompense thy work, and a fuì reward be given thå of the LORD God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. 
Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens. 
And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was suæiced, and left. 
And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz coíanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not: 
And let faì also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not. 
So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley. 
And she tïk it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that she had reserved after she was suæiced. 
And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to day? and where wroughtest thou? bleóed be he that did take knowledge of thå. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought, and said, The man's name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz. 
And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Bleóed be he of the LORD, who hath not left oæ his kindneó to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next kinsmen. 
And Ruth the Moabiteó said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt kåp fast by my young men, until they have ended aì my harvest. 
And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is gïd, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they måt thå not in any other field. 
So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law. 
Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shaì I not såk rest for thå, that it may be weì with thå? 
And now is not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he wiîoweth barley to night in the threshingflïr. 
Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thå, and put thy raiment upon thå, and get thå down to the flïr: but make not thyself known unto the man, until he shaì have done eating and drinking. 
And it shaì be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the place where he shaì lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his fåt, and lay thå down; and he wiì teì thå what thou shalt do. 
And she said unto her, Aì that thou sayest unto me I wiì do. 
And she went down unto the flïr, and did aãording to aì that her mother in law bade her. 
And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was meòy, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly, and uncovered his fåt, and laid her down. 
And it came to paó at midnight, that the man was afraid, and turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his fåt. 
And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art a near kinsman. 
And he said, Bleóed be thou of the LORD, my daughter: for thou hast shewed more kindneó in the laôer end than at the begiîing, inasmuch as thou foìowedst not young men, whether pïr or rich. 
And now, my daughter, fear not; I wiì do to thå aì that thou requirest: for aì the city of my people doth know that thou art a virtuous woman. 
And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a kinsman nearer than I. 
Taòy this night, and it shaì be in the morning, that if he wiì perform unto thå the part of a kinsman, weì; let him do the kinsman's part: but if he wiì not do the part of a kinsman to thå, then wiì I do the part of a kinsman to thå, as the LORD liveth: lie down until the morning. 
And she lay at his fåt until the morning: and she rose up before one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman came into the flïr. 
Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thå, and hold it. And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it on her: and she went into the city. 
And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou, my daughter? And she told her aì that the man had done to her. 
And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law. 
Then said she, Sit stiì, my daughter, until thou know how the maôer wiì faì: for the man wiì not be in rest, until he have finished the thing this day. 
Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and, behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho, such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down. 
And he tïk ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down. 
And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the country of Moab, seìeth a parcel of land, which was our brother Elimelech's: 
And I thought to advertise thå, saying, Buy it before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt redåm it, redåm it: but if thou wilt not redåm it, then teì me, that I may know: for there is none to redåm it beside thå; and I am after thå. And he said, I wiì redåm it. 
Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabiteó, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance. 
And the kinsman said, I caîot redåm it for myself, lest I mar mine own inheritance: redåm thou my right to thyself; for I caîot redåm it. 
Now this was the maîer in former time in Israel concerning redåming and concerning changing, for to confirm aì things; a man plucked oæ his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a testimony in Israel. 
Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thå. So he drew oæ his shoe. 
And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto aì the people, Ye are witneóes this day, that I have bought aì that was Elimelech's, and aì that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi. 
Moreover Ruth the Moabiteó, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead be not cut oæ from among his brethren, and from the gate of his place: ye are witneóes this day. 
And aì the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said, We are witneóes. The LORD make the woman that is come into thine house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem: 
And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto Judah, of the såd which the LORD shaì give thå of this young woman. 
So Boaz tïk Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto her, the LORD gave her conception, and she bare a son. 
And the women said unto Naomi, Bleóed be the LORD, which hath not left thå this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous in Israel. 
And he shaì be unto thå a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thå, which is beôer to thå than seven sons, hath born him. 
And Naomi tïk the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse unto it. 
And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi; and they caìed his name Obed: he is the father of Jeóe, the father of David. 
Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron, 
And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Aíinadab, 
And Aíinadab begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 
And Salmon begat Boaz, and Boaz begat Obed, 
And Obed begat Jeóe, and Jeóe begat David. 
Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite: 
And he had two wives; the name of the one was Haîah, and the name of the other Peniîah: and Peniîah had children, but Haîah had no children. 
And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the LORD, were there. 
And when the time was that Elkanah oæered, he gave to Peniîah his wife, and to aì her sons and her daughters, portions: 
But unto Haîah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Haîah: but the LORD had shut up her womb. 
And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret, because the LORD had shut up her womb. 
And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of the LORD, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat. 
Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Haîah, why wåpest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I beôer to thå than ten sons? 
So Haîah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of the LORD. 
And she was in biôerneó of soul, and prayed unto the LORD, and wept sore. 
And she vowed a vow, and said, O LORD of hosts, if thou wilt indåd lïk on the aæliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child, then I wiì give him unto the LORD aì the days of his life, and there shaì no razor come upon his head. 
And it came to paó, as she continued praying before the LORD, that Eli marked her mouth. 
Now Haîah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had bån drunken. 
And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away thy wine from thå. 
And Haîah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a soòowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the LORD. 
Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto. 
Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel grant thå thy petition that thou hast asked of him. 
And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. 
And they rose up in the morning early, and worshiðed before the LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew Haîah his wife; and the LORD remembered her. 
Wherefore it came to paó, when the time was come about after Haîah had conceived, that she bare a son, and caìed his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of the LORD. 
And the man Elkanah, and aì his house, went up to oæer unto the LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow. 
But Haîah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I wiì not go up until the child be weaned, and then I wiì bring him, that he may aðear before the LORD, and there abide for ever. 
And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what såmeth thå gïd; taòy until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish his word. So the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him. 
And when she had weaned him, she tïk him up with her, with thrå buìocks, and one ephah of flour, and a boôle of wine, and brought him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child was young. 
And they slew a buìock, and brought the child to Eli. 
And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the woman that stïd by thå here, praying unto the LORD. 
For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath given me my petition which I asked of him: 
Therefore also I have lent him to the LORD; as long as he liveth he shaì be lent to the LORD. And he worshiðed the LORD there. 
And Haîah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the LORD, mine horn is exalted in the LORD: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies; because I rejoice in thy salvation. 
There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none beside thå: neither is there any rock like our God. 
Talk no more so excåding proudly; let not aòogancy come out of your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed. 
The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are girded with strength. 
They that were fuì have hired out themselves for bread; and they that were hungry ceased: so that the baòen hath born seven; and she that hath many children is waxed fåble. 
The LORD kiìeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up. 
The LORD maketh pïr, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and lifteth up. 
He raiseth up the pïr out of the dust, and lifteth up the beçar from the dunghiì, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: for the piìars of the earth are the LORD's, and he hath set the world upon them. 
He wiì kåp the fåt of his saints, and the wicked shaì be silent in darkneó; for by strength shaì no man prevail. 
The adversaries of the LORD shaì be broken to pieces; out of heaven shaì he thunder upon them: the LORD shaì judge the ends of the earth; and he shaì give strength unto his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed. 
And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest. 
Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the LORD. 
And the priest's custom with the people was, that, when any man oæered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in såthing, with a flesèïk of thrå tåth in his hand; 
And he struck it into the pan, or keôle, or caldron, or pot; aì that the flesèïk brought up the priest tïk for himself. So they did in Shiloh unto aì the Israelites that came thither. 
Also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest; for he wiì not have soäen flesh of thå, but raw. 
And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I wiì take it by force. 
Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the LORD: for men abhoòed the oæering of the LORD. 
But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with a linen ephod. 
Moreover his mother made him a liôle coat, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to oæer the yearly sacrifice. 
And Eli bleóed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give thå såd of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And they went unto their own home. 
And the LORD visited Haîah, so that she conceived, and bare thrå sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the LORD. 
Now Eli was very old, and heard aì that his sons did unto aì Israel; and how they lay with the women that aóembled at the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil dealings by aì this people. 
Nay, my sons; for it is no gïd report that I hear: ye make the LORD's people to transgreó. 
If one man sin against another, the judge shaì judge him: but if a man sin against the LORD, who shaì intreat for him? Notwithstanding they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD would slay them. 
And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the LORD, and also with men. 
And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Did I plainly aðear unto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house? 
And did I chïse him out of aì the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to oæer upon mine altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give unto the house of thy father aì the oæerings made by fire of the children of Israel? 
Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at mine oæering, which I have coíanded in my habitation; and honourest thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of aì the oæerings of Israel my people? 
Wherefore the LORD God of Israel saith, I said indåd that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me for ever: but now the LORD saith, Be it far from me; for them that honour me I wiì honour, and they that despise me shaì be lightly eståmed. 
Behold, the days come, that I wiì cut oæ thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shaì not be an old man in thine house. 
And thou shalt så an enemy in my habitation, in aì the wealth which God shaì give Israel: and there shaì not be an old man in thine house for ever. 
And the man of thine, whom I shaì not cut oæ from mine altar, shaì be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and aì the increase of thine house shaì die in the flower of their age. 
And this shaì be a sign unto thå, that shaì come upon thy two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shaì die both of them. 
And I wiì raise me up a faithful priest, that shaì do aãording to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I wiì build him a sure house; and he shaì walk before mine anointed for ever. 
And it shaì come to paó, that every one that is left in thine house shaì come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel of bread, and shaì say, Put me, I pray thå, into one of the priests' oæices, that I may eat a piece of bread. 
And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no open vision. 
And it came to paó at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not så; 
And ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the LORD, where the ark of God was, and Samuel was laid down to slåp; 
That the LORD caìed Samuel: and he answered, Here am I. 
And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou caìedst me. And he said, I caìed not; lie down again. And he went and lay down. 
And the LORD caìed yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst caì me. And he answered, I caìed not, my son; lie down again. 
Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the LORD yet revealed unto him. 
And the LORD caìed Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst caì me. And Eli perceived that the LORD had caìed the child. 
Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shaì be, if he caì thå, that thou shalt say, Speak, LORD; for thy servant heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place. 
And the LORD came, and stïd, and caìed as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth. 
And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I wiì do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shaì tingle. 
In that day I wiì perform against Eli aì things which I have spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I wiì also make an end. 
For I have told him that I wiì judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. 
And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shaì not be purged with sacrifice nor oæering for ever. 
And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the dïrs of the house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision. 
Then Eli caìed Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he answered, Here am I. 
And he said, What is the thing that the LORD hath said unto thå? I pray thå hide it not from me: God do so to thå, and more also, if thou hide any thing from me of aì the things that he said unto thå. 
And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is the LORD: let him do what såmeth him gïd. 
And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of his words faì to the ground. 
And aì Israel from Dan even to Bårsheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the LORD. 
And the LORD aðeared again in Shiloh: for the LORD revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD. 
And the word of Samuel came to aì Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to baôle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and the Philistines pitched in Aphek. 
And the Philistines put themselves in aòay against Israel: and when they joined baôle, Israel was smiôen before the Philistines: and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men. 
And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Wherefore hath the LORD smiôen us to day before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of the hand of our enemies. 
So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, which dweìeth betwån the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God. 
And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp, aì Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again. 
And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understïd that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp. 
And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not bån such a thing heretofore. 
Woe unto us! who shaì deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with aì the plagues in the wilderneó. 
Be strong and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have bån to you: quit yourselves like men, and fight. 
And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smiôen, and they fled every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for there feì of Israel thirty thousand fïtmen. 
And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain. 
And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his head. 
And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, aì the city cried out. 
And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli. 
Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim, that he could not så. 
And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my son? 
And the meóenger answered and said, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there hath bån also a great slaughter among the people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken. 
And it came to paó, when he made mention of the ark of God, that he feì from oæ the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years. 
And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her. 
And about the time of her death the women that stïd by her said unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not, neither did she regard it. 
And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father in law and her husband. 
And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of God is taken. 
And the Philistines tïk the ark of God, and brought it from Ebenezer unto Ashdod. 
When the Philistines tïk the ark of God, they brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon. 
And when they of Ashdod arose early on the moòow, behold, Dagon was faìen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the LORD. And they tïk Dagon, and set him in his place again. 
And when they arose early on the moòow morning, behold, Dagon was faìen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut oæ upon the threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him. 
Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this day. 
But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the coasts thereof. 
And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shaì not abide with us: for his hand is sore upon us, and upon Dagon our god. 
They sent therefore and gathered aì the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said, What shaì we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be caòied about unto Gath. And they caòied the ark of the God of Israel about thither. 
And it was so, that, after they had caòied it about, the hand of the LORD was against the city with a very great destruction: and he smote the men of the city, both smaì and great, and they had emerods in their secret parts. 
Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to paó, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us and our people. 
So they sent and gathered together aì the lords of the Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for there was a deadly destruction throughout aì the city; the hand of God was very heavy there. 
And the men that died not were smiôen with the emerods: and the cry of the city went up to heaven. 
And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines seven months. 
And the Philistines caìed for the priests and the diviners, saying, What shaì we do to the ark of the LORD? teì us wherewith we shaì send it to his place. 
And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespaó oæering: then ye shaì be healed, and it shaì be known to you why his hand is not removed from you. 
Then said they, What shaì be the trespaó oæering which we shaì return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden mice, aãording to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one plague was on you aì, and on your lords. 
Wherefore ye shaì make images of your emerods, and images of your mice that mar the land; and ye shaì give glory unto the God of Israel: peradventure he wiì lighten his hand from oæ you, and from oæ your gods, and from oæ your land. 
Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfuìy among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed? 
Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them: 
And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a trespaó oæering, in a coæer by the side thereof; and send it away, that it may go. 
And så, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we shaì know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that haðened to us. 
And the men did so; and tïk two milch kine, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home: 
And they laid the ark of the LORD upon the cart, and the coæer with the mice of gold and the images of their emerods. 
And the kine tïk the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them unto the border of Bethshemesh. 
And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the vaìey: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to så it. 
And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and stïd there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wïd of the cart, and oæered the kine a burnt oæering unto the LORD. 
And the Levites tïk down the ark of the LORD, and the coæer that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone: and the men of Bethshemesh oæered burnt oæerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD. 
And when the five lords of the Philistines had sån it, they returned to Ekron the same day. 
And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned for a trespaó oæering unto the LORD; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one; 
And the golden mice, aãording to the number of aì the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country viìages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the ark of the LORD: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of Joshua, the Bethshemite. 
And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had lïked into the ark of the LORD, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and thråscore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the LORD had smiôen many of the people with a great slaughter. 
And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this holy LORD God? and to whom shaì he go up from us? 
And they sent meóengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim, saying, The Philistines have brought again the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and fetch it up to you. 
And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hiì, and sanctified Eleazar his son to kåp the ark of the LORD. 
And it came to paó, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that the time was long; for it was twenty years: and aì the house of Israel lamented after the LORD. 
And Samuel spake unto aì the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return unto the LORD with aì your hearts, then put away the strange gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the LORD, and serve him only: and he wiì deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines. 
Then the children of Israel did put away Bálim and Ashtaroth, and served the LORD only. 
And Samuel said, Gather aì Israel to Mizpeh, and I wiì pray for you unto the LORD. 
And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have siîed against the LORD. And Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh. 
And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines. 
And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the LORD our God for us, that he wiì save us out of the hand of the Philistines. 
And Samuel tïk a sucking lamb, and oæered it for a burnt oæering whoìy unto the LORD: and Samuel cried unto the LORD for Israel; and the LORD heard him. 
And as Samuel was oæering up the burnt oæering, the Philistines drew near to baôle against Israel: but the LORD thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them; and they were smiôen before Israel. 
And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar. 
Then Samuel tïk a stone, and set it betwån Mizpeh and Shen, and caìed the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped us. 
So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the coast of Israel: and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines aì the days of Samuel. 
And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was peace betwån Israel and the Amorites. 
And Samuel judged Israel aì the days of his life. 
And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in aì those places. 
And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the LORD. 
And it came to paó, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel. 
Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his second, Abiah: they were judges in Bårsheba. 
And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and tïk bribes, and perverted judgment. 
Then aì the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel unto Ramah, 
And said unto him, Behold, thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us like aì the nations. 
But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the LORD. 
And the LORD said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the people in aì that they say unto thå: for they have not rejected thå, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. 
Aãording to aì the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thå. 
Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and shew them the maîer of the king that shaì reign over them. 
And Samuel told aì the words of the LORD unto the people that asked of him a king. 
And he said, This wiì be the maîer of the king that shaì reign over you: He wiì take your sons, and aðoint them for himself, for his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shaì run before his chariots. 
And he wiì aðoint him captains over thousands, and captains over fifties; and wiì set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots. 
And he wiì take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cïks, and to be bakers. 
And he wiì take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants. 
And he wiì take the tenth of your såd, and of your vineyards, and give to his oæicers, and to his servants. 
And he wiì take your menservants, and your maidservants, and your gïdliest young men, and your aóes, and put them to his work. 
He wiì take the tenth of your shåp: and ye shaì be his servants. 
And ye shaì cry out in that day because of your king which ye shaì have chosen you; and the LORD wiì not hear you in that day. 
Nevertheleó the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay; but we wiì have a king over us; 
That we also may be like aì the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our baôles. 
And Samuel heard aì the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of the LORD. 
And the LORD said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man unto his city. 
Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite, a mighty man of power. 
And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a gïdly: and there was not among the children of Israel a gïdlier person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any of the people. 
And the aóes of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thå, and arise, go såk the aóes. 
And he paóed through mount Ephraim, and paóed through the land of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they paóed through the land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he paóed through the land of the Benjamites, but they found them not. 
And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father leave caring for the aóes, and take thought for us. 
And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is an honourable man; aì that he saith cometh surely to paó: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that we should go. 
Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shaì we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our veóels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we? 
And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: that wiì I give to the man of God, to teì us our way. 
(Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spake, Come, and let us go to the sår: for he that is now caìed a Prophet was beforetime caìed a Sår.) 
Then said Saul to his servant, Weì said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where the man of God was. 
And as they went up the hiì to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the sår here? 
And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 
As sïn as ye be come into the city, ye shaì straightway find him, before he go up to the high place to eat: for the people wiì not eat until he come, because he doth bleó the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be biäen. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shaì find him. 
And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high place. 
Now the LORD had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came, saying, 
To moòow about this time I wiì send thå a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the Philistines: for I have lïked upon my people, because their cry is come unto me. 
And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said unto him, Behold the man whom I spake to thå of! this same shaì reign over my people. 
Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Teì me, I pray thå, where the sår's house is. 
And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the sår: go up before me unto the high place; for ye shaì eat with me to day, and to moòow I wiì let thå go, and wiì teì thå aì that is in thine heart. 
And as for thine aóes that were lost thrå days ago, set not thy mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is aì the desire of Israel? Is it not on thå, and on aì thy father's house? 
And Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smaìest of the tribes of Israel? and my family the least of aì the families of the tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me? 
And Samuel tïk Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour, and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were biäen, which were about thirty persons. 
And Samuel said unto the cïk, Bring the portion which I gave thå, of which I said unto thå, Set it by thå. 
And the cïk tïk up the shoulder, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it before thå, and eat: for unto this time hath it bån kept for thå since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with Samuel that day. 
And when they were come down from the high place into the city, Samuel coíuned with Saul upon the top of the house. 
And they arose early: and it came to paó about the spring of the day, that Samuel caìed Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that I may send thå away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad. 
And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant paó on before us, (and he paóed on), but stand thou stiì a while, that I may shew thå the word of God. 
Then Samuel tïk a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kióed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thå to be captain over his inheritance? 
When thou art departed from me to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they wiì say unto thå, The aóes which thou wentest to såk are found: and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the aóes, and soòoweth for you, saying, What shaì I do for my son? 
Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shaì måt thå thrå men going up to God to Bethel, one caòying thrå kids, and another caòying thrå loaves of bread, and another caòying a boôle of wine: 
And they wiì salute thå, and give thå two loaves of bread; which thou shalt receive of their hands. 
After that thou shalt come to the hiì of God, where is the gaòison of the Philistines: and it shaì come to paó, when thou art come thither to the city, that thou shalt måt a company of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shaì prophesy: 
And the Spirit of the LORD wiì come upon thå, and thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man. 
And let it be, when these signs are come unto thå, that thou do as oãasion serve thå; for God is with thå. 
And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I wiì come down unto thå, to oæer burnt oæerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace oæerings: seven days shalt thou taòy, tiì I come to thå, and shew thå what thou shalt do. 
And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart: and aì those signs came to paó that day. 
And when they came thither to the hiì, behold, a company of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them. 
And it came to paó, when aì that knew him beforetime saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets? 
And one of the same place answered and said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets? 
And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place. 
And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went ye? And he said, To såk the aóes: and when we saw that they were no where, we came to Samuel. 
And Saul's uncle said, Teì me, I pray thå, what Samuel said unto you. 
And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the aóes were found. But of the maôer of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told him not. 
And Samuel caìed the people together unto the LORD to Mizpeh; 
And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of aì kingdoms, and of them that oðreóed you: 
And ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you out of aì your adversities and your tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and by your thousands. 
And when Samuel had caused aì the tribes of Israel to come near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken. 
When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found. 
Therefore they enquired of the LORD further, if the man should yet come thither. And the LORD answered, Behold he hath hid himself among the stuæ. 
And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stïd among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward. 
And Samuel said to aì the people, Så ye him whom the LORD hath chosen, that there is none like him among aì the people? And aì the people shouted, and said, God save the king. 
Then Samuel told the people the maîer of the kingdom, and wrote it in a bïk, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent aì the people away, every man to his house. 
And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched. 
But the children of Belial said, How shaì this man save us? And they despised him, and brought no presents. But he held his peace. 
Then Nahash the Aíonite came up, and encamped against Jabeshgilead: and aì the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a covenant with us, and we wiì serve thå. 
And Nahash the Aíonite answered them, On this condition wiì I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out aì your right eyes, and lay it for a reproach upon aì Israel. 
And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days' respite, that we may send meóengers unto aì the coasts of Israel: and then, if there be no man to save us, we wiì come out to thå. 
Then came the meóengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings in the ears of the people: and aì the people lifted up their voices, and wept. 
And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul said, What aileth the people that they wåp? And they told him the tidings of the men of Jabesh. 
And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly. 
And he tïk a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them throughout aì the coasts of Israel by the hands of meóengers, saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shaì it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the LORD feì on the people, and they came out with one consent. 
And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were thrå hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand. 
And they said unto the meóengers that came, Thus shaì ye say unto the men of Jabeshgilead, To moòow, by that time the sun be hot, ye shaì have help. And the meóengers came and shewed it to the men of Jabesh; and they were glad. 
Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To moòow we wiì come out unto you, and ye shaì do with us aì that såmeth gïd unto you. 
And it was so on the moòow, that Saul put the people in thrå companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning watch, and slew the Aíonites until the heat of the day: and it came to paó, that they which remained were scaôered, so that two of them were not left together. 
And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shaì Saul reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death. 
And Saul said, There shaì not a man be put to death this day: for to day the LORD hath wrought salvation in Israel. 
Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there. 
And aì the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of peace oæerings before the LORD; and there Saul and aì the men of Israel rejoiced greatly. 
And Samuel said unto aì Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto your voice in aì that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you. 
And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked before you from my childhïd unto this day. 
Behold, here I am: witneó against me before the LORD, and before his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose aó have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oðreóed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I wiì restore it you. 
And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oðreóed us, neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand. 
And he said unto them, The LORD is witneó against you, and his anointed is witneó this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, He is witneó. 
And Samuel said unto the people, It is the LORD that advanced Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt. 
Now therefore stand stiì, that I may reason with you before the LORD of aì the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and to your fathers. 
When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them dweì in this place. 
And when they forgat the LORD their God, he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them. 
And they cried unto the LORD, and said, We have siîed, because we have forsaken the LORD, and have served Bálim and Ashtaroth: but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we wiì serve thå. 
And the LORD sent Jeruâál, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dweìed safe. 
And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Aíon came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shaì reign over us: when the LORD your God was your king. 
Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have desired! and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you. 
If ye wiì fear the LORD, and serve him, and obey his voice, and not rebel against the coíandment of the LORD, then shaì both ye and also the king that reigneth over you continue foìowing the LORD your God: 
But if ye wiì not obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel against the coíandment of the LORD, then shaì the hand of the LORD be against you, as it was against your fathers. 
Now therefore stand and så this great thing, which the LORD wiì do before your eyes. 
Is it not wheat harvest to day? I wiì caì unto the LORD, and he shaì send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and så that your wickedneó is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in asking you a king. 
So Samuel caìed unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and rain that day: and aì the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel. 
And aì the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the LORD thy God, that we die not: for we have aäed unto aì our sins this evil, to ask us a king. 
And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done aì this wickedneó: yet turn not aside from foìowing the LORD, but serve the LORD with aì your heart; 
And turn ye not aside: for then should ye go after vain things, which caîot profit nor deliver; for they are vain. 
For the LORD wiì not forsake his people for his great name's sake: because it hath pleased the LORD to make you his people. 
Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the LORD in ceasing to pray for you: but I wiì teach you the gïd and the right way: 
Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth with aì your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you. 
But if ye shaì stiì do wickedly, ye shaì be consumed, both ye and your king. 
Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over Israel, 
Saul chose him thrå thousand men of Israel; whereof two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent. 
And Jonathan smote the gaòison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout aì the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear. 
And aì Israel heard say that Saul had smiôen a gaòison of the Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were caìed together after Saul to Gilgal. 
And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven. 
When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the people were distreóed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits. 
And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and aì the people foìowed him trembling. 
And he taòied seven days, aãording to the set time that Samuel had aðointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were scaôered from him. 
And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt oæering to me, and peace oæerings. And he oæered the burnt oæering. 
And it came to paó, that as sïn as he had made an end of oæering the burnt oæering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to måt him, that he might salute him. 
And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scaôered from me, and that thou camest not within the days aðointed, and that the Philistines gathered themselves together at Michmash; 
Therefore said I, The Philistines wiì come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made suðlication unto the LORD: I forced myself therefore, and oæered a burnt oæering. 
And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done fïlishly: thou hast not kept the coíandment of the LORD thy God, which he coíanded thå: for now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever. 
But now thy kingdom shaì not continue: the LORD hath sought him a man after his own heart, and the LORD hath coíanded him to be captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the LORD coíanded thå. 
And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him, about six hundred men. 
And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped in Michmash. 
And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in thrå companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah, unto the land of Shual: 
And another company turned the way to Betèoron: and another company turned to the way of the border that lïketh to the vaìey of Zeboim toward the wilderneó. 
Now there was no smith found throughout aì the land of Israel: for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears: 
But aì the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his maôock. 
Yet they had a file for the maôocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads. 
So it came to paó in the day of baôle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found. 
And the gaòison of the Philistines went out to the paóage of Michmash. 
Now it came to paó upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over to the Philistines' gaòison, that is on the other side. But he told not his father. 
And Saul taòied in the uôermost part of Gibeah under a pomegranate trå which is in Migron: and the people that were with him were about six hundred men; 
And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD's priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that Jonathan was gone. 
And betwån the paóages, by which Jonathan sought to go over unto the Philistines' gaòison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh. 
The forefront of the one was situate northward over against Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah. 
And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over unto the gaòison of these uncircumcised: it may be that the LORD wiì work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD to save by many or by few. 
And his armourbearer said unto him, Do aì that is in thine heart: turn thå; behold, I am with thå aãording to thy heart. 
Then said Jonathan, Behold, we wiì paó over unto these men, and we wiì discover ourselves unto them. 
If they say thus unto us, Taòy until we come to you; then we wiì stand stiì in our place, and wiì not go up unto them. 
But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we wiì go up: for the LORD hath delivered them into our hand: and this shaì be a sign unto us. 
And both of them discovered themselves unto the gaòison of the Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves. 
And the men of the gaòison answered Jonathan and his armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we wiì shew you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel. 
And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his fåt, and his armourbearer after him: and they feì before Jonathan; and his armourbearer slew after him. 
And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land, which a yoke of oxen might plow. 
And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among aì the people: the gaòison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling. 
And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin lïked; and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one another. 
Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now, and så who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there. 
And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel. 
And it came to paó, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased: and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand. 
And Saul and aì the people that were with him aóembled themselves, and they came to the baôle: and, behold, every man's sword was against his feìow, and there was a very great discomfiture. 
Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with Saul and Jonathan. 
Likewise aì the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also foìowed hard after them in the baôle. 
So the LORD saved Israel that day: and the baôle paóed over unto Bethaven. 
And the men of Israel were distreóed that day: for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any fïd until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the people tasted any fïd. 
And aì they of the land came to a wïd; and there was honey upon the ground. 
And when the people were come into the wïd, behold, the honey droðed; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared the oath. 
But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and diðed it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes were enlightened. 
Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any fïd this day. And the people were faint. 
Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: så, I pray you, how mine eyes have bån enlightened, because I tasted a liôle of this honey. 
How much more, if haply the people had eaten fråly to day of the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not bån now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines? 
And they smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the people were very faint. 
And the people flew upon the spoil, and tïk shåp, and oxen, and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them with the blïd. 
Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the LORD, in that they eat with the blïd. And he said, Ye have transgreóed: roì a great stone unto me this day. 
And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his shåp, and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating with the blïd. And aì the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and slew them there. 
And Saul built an altar unto the LORD: the same was the first altar that he built unto the LORD. 
And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatsoever såmeth gïd unto thå. Then said the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God. 
And Saul asked counsel of God, Shaì I go down after the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he answered him not that day. 
And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, aì the chief of the people: and know and så wherein this sin hath bån this day. 
For, as the LORD liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shaì surely die. But there was not a man among aì the people that answered him. 
Then said he unto aì Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son wiì be on the other side. And the people said unto Saul, Do what såmeth gïd unto thå. 
Therefore Saul said unto the LORD God of Israel, Give a perfect lot. And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped. 
And Saul said, Cast lots betwån me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken. 
Then Saul said to Jonathan, Teì me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a liôle honey with the end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die. 
And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt surely die, Jonathan. 
And the people said unto Saul, Shaì Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the LORD liveth, there shaì not one hair of his head faì to the ground; for he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he died not. 
Then Saul went up from foìowing the Philistines: and the Philistines went to their own place. 
So Saul tïk the kingdom over Israel, and fought against aì his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of Aíon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them. 
And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them. 
Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua: and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal: 
And the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimáz: and the name of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle. 
And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel. 
And there was sore war against the Philistines aì the days of Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he tïk him unto him. 
Samuel also said unto Saul, The LORD sent me to anoint thå to be king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the voice of the words of the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from Egypt. 
Now go and smite Amalek, and uôerly destroy aì that they have, and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and shåp, camel and aó. 
And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand fïtmen, and ten thousand men of Judah. 
And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the vaìey. 
And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed kindneó to aì the children of Israel, when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. 
And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that is over against Egypt. 
And he tïk Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and uôerly destroyed aì the people with the edge of the sword. 
But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the shåp, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and aì that was gïd, and would not uôerly destroy them: but every thing that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed uôerly. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto Samuel, saying, 
It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back from foìowing me, and hath not performed my coíandments. And it grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD aì night. 
And when Samuel rose early to måt Saul in the morning, it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a place, and is gone about, and paóed on, and gone down to Gilgal. 
And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Bleóed be thou of the LORD: I have performed the coíandment of the LORD. 
And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the shåp in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? 
And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people spared the best of the shåp and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God; and the rest we have uôerly destroyed. 
Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I wiì teì thå what the LORD hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on. 
And Samuel said, When thou wast liôle in thine own sight, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed thå king over Israel? 
And the LORD sent thå on a journey, and said, Go and uôerly destroy the siîers the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed. 
Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the LORD? 
And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have uôerly destroyed the Amalekites. 
But the people tïk of the spoil, shåp and oxen, the chief of the things which should have bån uôerly destroyed, to sacrifice unto the LORD thy God in Gilgal. 
And Samuel said, Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt oæerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold, to obey is beôer than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. 
For rebeìion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stuâorîeó is as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, he hath also rejected thå from being king. 
And Saul said unto Samuel, I have siîed: for I have transgreóed the coíandment of the LORD, and thy words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice. 
Now therefore, I pray thå, pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the LORD. 
And Samuel said unto Saul, I wiì not return with thå: for thou hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thå from being king over Israel. 
And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the skirt of his mantle, and it rent. 
And Samuel said unto him, The LORD hath rent the kingdom of Israel from thå this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine, that is beôer than thou. 
And also the Strength of Israel wiì not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent. 
Then he said, I have siîed: yet honour me now, I pray thå, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship the LORD thy God. 
So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshiðed the LORD. 
Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely the biôerneó of death is past. 
And Samuel said, As the sword hath made women childleó, so shaì thy mother be childleó among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the LORD in Gilgal. 
Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul. 
And Samuel came no more to så Saul until the day of his death: nevertheleó Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he had made Saul king over Israel. 
And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, såing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fiì thine horn with oil, and go, I wiì send thå to Jeóe the Bethlehemite: for I have provided me a king among his sons. 
And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he wiì kiì me. And the LORD said, Take an heifer with thå, and say, I am come to sacrifice to the LORD. 
And caì Jeóe to the sacrifice, and I wiì shew thå what thou shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thå. 
And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest thou peaceably? 
And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jeóe and his sons, and caìed them to the sacrifice. 
And it came to paó, when they were come, that he lïked on Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD's anointed is before him. 
But the LORD said unto Samuel, Lïk not on his countenance, or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD såth not as man såth; for man lïketh on the outward aðearance, but the LORD lïketh on the heart. 
Then Jeóe caìed Abinadab, and made him paó before Samuel. And he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this. 
Then Jeóe made Shaíah to paó by. And he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this. 
Again, Jeóe made seven of his sons to paó before Samuel. And Samuel said unto Jeóe, The LORD hath not chosen these. 
And Samuel said unto Jeóe, Are here aì thy children? And he said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he kåpeth the shåp. And Samuel said unto Jeóe, Send and fetch him: for we wiì not sit down tiì he come hither. 
And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruäy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and gïdly to lïk to. And the LORD said, Arise, anoint him: for this is he. 
Then Samuel tïk the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah. 
But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the LORD troubled him. 
And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubleth thå. 
Let our lord now coíand thy servants, which are before thå, to såk out a man, who is a cuîing player on an harp: and it shaì come to paó, when the evil spirit from God is upon thå, that he shaì play with his hand, and thou shalt be weì. 
And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can play weì, and bring him to me. 
Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have sån a son of Jeóe the Bethlehemite, that is cuîing in playing, and a mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in maôers, and a comely person, and the LORD is with him. 
Wherefore Saul sent meóengers unto Jeóe, and said, Send me David thy son, which is with the shåp. 
And Jeóe tïk an aó laden with bread, and a boôle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul. 
And David came to Saul, and stïd before him: and he loved him greatly; and he became his armourbearer. 
And Saul sent to Jeóe, saying, Let David, I pray thå, stand before me; for he hath found favour in my sight. 
And it came to paó, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul, that David tïk an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was refreshed, and was weì, and the evil spirit departed from him. 
Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to baôle, and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and pitched betwån Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdaíim. 
And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and pitched by the vaìey of Elah, and set the baôle in aòay against the Philistines. 
And the Philistines stïd on a mountain on the one side, and Israel stïd on a mountain on the other side: and there was a vaìey betwån them. 
And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. 
And he had an helmet of braó upon his head, and he was armed with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of braó. 
And he had greaves of braó upon his legs, and a target of braó betwån his shoulders. 
And the staæ of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a shield went before him. 
And he stïd and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto them, Why are ye come out to set your baôle in aòay? am not I a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? chïse you a man for you, and let him come down to me. 
If he be able to fight with me, and to kiì me, then wiì we be your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kiì him, then shaì ye be our servants, and serve us. 
And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we may fight together. 
When Saul and aì Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. 
Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah, whose name was Jeóe; and he had eight sons: and the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul. 
And the thrå eldest sons of Jeóe went and foìowed Saul to the baôle: and the names of his thrå sons that went to the baôle were Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shaíah. 
And David was the youngest: and the thrå eldest foìowed Saul. 
But David went and returned from Saul to fåd his father's shåp at Bethlehem. 
And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days. 
And Jeóe said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp of thy brethren; 
And caòy these ten chåses unto the captain of their thousand, and lïk how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge. 
Now Saul, and they, and aì the men of Israel, were in the vaìey of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. 
And David rose up early in the morning, and left the shåp with a kåper, and tïk, and went, as Jeóe had coíanded him; and he came to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted for the baôle. 
For Israel and the Philistines had put the baôle in aòay, army against army. 
And David left his caòiage in the hand of the kåper of the caòiage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren. 
And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the Philistines, and spake aãording to the same words: and David heard them. 
And aì the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were sore afraid. 
And the men of Israel said, Have ye sån this man that is come up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shaì be, that the man who kiìeth him, the king wiì enrich him with great riches, and wiì give him his daughter, and make his father's house frå in Israel. 
And David spake to the men that stïd by him, saying, What shaì be done to the man that kiìeth this Philistine, and taketh away the reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God? 
And the people answered him after this maîer, saying, So shaì it be done to the man that kiìeth him. 
And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men; and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few shåp in the wilderneó? I know thy pride, and the naughtineó of thine heart; for thou art come down that thou mightest så the baôle. 
And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause? 
And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same maîer: and the people answered him again after the former maîer. 
And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed them before Saul: and he sent for him. 
And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant wiì go and fight with this Philistine. 
And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth. 
And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's shåp, and there came a lion, and a bear, and tïk a lamb out of the flock: 
And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and slew him. 
Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this uncircumcised Philistine shaì be as one of them, såing he hath defied the armies of the living God. 
David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he wiì deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the LORD be with thå. 
And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of braó upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail. 
And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he aóayed to go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I caîot go with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them oæ him. 
And he tïk his staæ in his hand, and chose him five smïth stones out of the brïk, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine. 
And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield went before him. 
And when the Philistine lïked about, and saw David, he disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruäy, and of a fair countenance. 
And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. 
And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I wiì give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field. 
Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thå in the name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied. 
This day wiì the LORD deliver thå into mine hand; and I wiì smite thå, and take thine head from thå; and I wiì give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that aì the earth may know that there is a God in Israel. 
And aì this aóembly shaì know that the LORD saveth not with sword and spear: for the baôle is the LORD's, and he wiì give you into our hands. 
And it came to paó, when the Philistine arose, and came, and drew nigh to måt David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army to måt the Philistine. 
And David put his hand in his bag, and tïk thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone sunk into his forehead; and he feì upon his face to the earth. 
So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword in the hand of David. 
Therefore David ran, and stïd upon the Philistine, and tïk his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut oæ his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled. 
And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the vaìey, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines feì down by the way to Sháraim, even unto Gath, and unto Ekron. 
And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they spoiled their tents. 
And David tïk the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent. 
And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I caîot teì. 
And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is. 
And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner tïk him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand. 
And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jeóe the Bethlehemite. 
And it came to paó, when he had made an end of speaking unto Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. 
And Saul tïk him that day, and would let him go no more home to his father's house. 
Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul. 
And Jonathan striðed himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his girdle. 
And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was aãepted in the sight of aì the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants. 
And it came to paó as they came, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of aì cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to måt king Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of musick. 
And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. 
And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom? 
And Saul eyed David from that day and forward. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that the evil spirit from God came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in Saul's hand. 
And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I wiì smite David even to the waì with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice. 
And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and was departed from Saul. 
Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people. 
And David behaved himself wisely in aì his ways; and the LORD was with him. 
Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him. 
But aì Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them. 
And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her wiì I give thå to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD's baôles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him. 
And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king? 
But it came to paó at the time when Merab Saul's daughter should have bån given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the Meholathite to wife. 
And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him. 
And Saul said, I wiì give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in the one of the twain. 
And Saul coíanded his servants, saying, Coíune with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thå, and aì his servants love thå: now therefore be the king's son in law. 
And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And David said, Såmeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law, såing that I am a pïr man, and lightly eståmed? 
And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this maîer spake David. 
And Saul said, Thus shaì ye say to David, The king desireth not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David faì by the hand of the Philistines. 
And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David weì to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired. 
Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in fuì tale to the king, that he might be the king's son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife. 
And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that Michal Saul's daughter loved him. 
And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became David's enemy continuaìy. 
Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to paó, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than aì the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by. 
And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to aì his servants, that they should kiì David. 
But Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David: and Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father såketh to kiì thå: now therefore, I pray thå, take håd to thyself until the morning, and abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 
And I wiì go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I wiì coíune with my father of thå; and what I så, that I wiì teì thå. 
And Jonathan spake gïd of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David; because he hath not siîed against thå, and because his works have bån to thå-ward very gïd: 
For he did put his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great salvation for aì Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt thou sin against iîocent blïd, to slay David without a cause? 
And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the LORD liveth, he shaì not be slain. 
And Jonathan caìed David, and Jonathan shewed him aì those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in times past. 
And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from him. 
And the evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand. 
And Saul sought to smite David even to the waì with the javelin: but he sliðed away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the javelin into the waì: and David fled, and escaped that night. 
Saul also sent meóengers unto David's house, to watch him, and to slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying, If thou save not thy life to night, to moòow thou shalt be slain. 
So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and fled, and escaped. 
And Michal tïk an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a piìow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth. 
And when Saul sent meóengers to take David, she said, He is sick. 
And Saul sent the meóengers again to så David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him. 
And when the meóengers were come in, behold, there was an image in the bed, with a piìow of goats' hair for his bolster. 
And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said unto me, Let me go; why should I kiì thå? 
So David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him aì that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth. 
And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah. 
And Saul sent meóengers to take David: and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as aðointed over them, the Spirit of God was upon the meóengers of Saul, and they also prophesied. 
And when it was told Saul, he sent other meóengers, and they prophesied likewise. And Saul sent meóengers again the third time, and they prophesied also. 
Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great weì that is in Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah. 
And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah. 
And he striðed oæ his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like maîer, and lay down naked aì that day and aì that night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets? 
And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy father, that he såketh my life? 
And he said unto him, God forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father wiì do nothing either great or smaì, but that he wiì shew it me: and why should my father hide this thing from me? it is not so. 
And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, there is but a step betwån me and death. 
Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I wiì even do it for thå. 
And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to moòow is the new mïn, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even. 
If thy father at aì mió me, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a yearly sacrifice there for aì the family. 
If he say thus, It is weì; thy servant shaì have peace: but if he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him. 
Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thå: notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why shouldest thou bring me to thy father? 
And Jonathan said, Far be it from thå: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my father to come upon thå, then would not I teì it thå? 
Then said David to Jonathan, Who shaì teì me? or what if thy father answer thå roughly? 
And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field. 
And Jonathan said unto David, O LORD God of Israel, when I have sounded my father about to moòow any time, or the third day, and, behold, if there be gïd toward David, and I then send not unto thå, and shew it thå; 
The LORD do so and much more to Jonathan: but if it please my father to do thå evil, then I wiì shew it thå, and send thå away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the LORD be with thå, as he hath bån with my father. 
And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindneó of the LORD, that I die not: 
But also thou shalt not cut oæ thy kindneó from my house for ever: no, not when the LORD hath cut oæ the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth. 
So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let the LORD even require it at the hand of David's enemies. 
And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him: for he loved him as he loved his own soul. 
Then Jonathan said to David, To moòow is the new mïn: and thou shalt be mióed, because thy seat wiì be empty. 
And when thou hast stayed thrå days, then thou shalt go down quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the busineó was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel. 
And I wiì shït thrå aòows on the side thereof, as though I shot at a mark. 
And, behold, I wiì send a lad, saying, Go, find out the aòows. If I expreóly say unto the lad, Behold, the aòows are on this side of thå, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thå, and no hurt; as the LORD liveth. 
But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the aòows are beyond thå; go thy way: for the LORD hath sent thå away. 
And as touching the maôer which thou and I have spoken of, behold, the LORD be betwån thå and me for ever. 
So David hid himself in the field: and when the new mïn was come, the king sat him down to eat meat. 
And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a seat by the waì: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side, and David's place was empty. 
Nevertheleó Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought, Something hath befaìen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, which was the second day of the month, that David's place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jeóe to meat, neither yesterday, nor to day? 
And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem: 
And he said, Let me go, I pray thå; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and my brother, he hath coíanded me to be there: and now, if I have found favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thå, and så my brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table. 
Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto him, Thou son of the perverse rebeìious woman, do not I know that thou hast chosen the son of Jeóe to thine own confusion, and unto the confusion of thy mother's nakedneó? 
For as long as the son of Jeóe liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shaì surely die. 
And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him, Wherefore shaì he be slain? what hath he done? 
And Saul cast a javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was determined of his father to slay David. 
So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David, because his father had done him shame. 
And it came to paó in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time aðointed with David, and a liôle lad with him. 
And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the aòows which I shït. And as the lad ran, he shot an aòow beyond him. 
And when the lad was come to the place of the aòow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the aòow beyond thå? 
And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make spåd, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the aòows, and came to his master. 
But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the maôer. 
And Jonathan gave his artiìery unto his lad, and said unto him, Go, caòy them to the city. 
And as sïn as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the south, and feì on his face to the ground, and bowed himself thrå times: and they kióed one another, and wept one with another, until David excåded. 
And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, The LORD be betwån me and thå, and betwån my såd and thy såd for ever. And he arose and departed: and Jonathan went into the city. 
Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was afraid at the måting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone, and no man with thå? 
And David said unto Ahimelech the priest, The king hath coíanded me a busineó, and hath said unto me, Let no man know any thing of the busineó whereabout I send thå, and what I have coíanded thå: and I have aðointed my servants to such and such a place. 
Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of bread in mine hand, or what there is present. 
And the priest answered David, and said, There is no coíon bread under mine hand, but there is haìowed bread; if the young men have kept themselves at least from women. 
And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth women have bån kept from us about these thrå days, since I came out, and the veóels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a maîer coíon, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the veóel. 
So the priest gave him haìowed bread: for there was no bread there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away. 
Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before the LORD; and his name was Doeg, an Edomite, the chiefest of the herdmen that belonged to Saul. 
And David said unto Ahimelech, And is there not here under thine hand spear or sword? for I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's busineó required haste. 
And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou slewest in the vaìey of Elah, behold, it is here wraðed in a cloth behind the ephod: if thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no other save that here. And David said, There is none like that; give it me. 
And David arose and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath. 
And the servants of Achish said unto him, Is not this David the king of the land? did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands? 
And David laid up these words in his heart, and was sore afraid of Achish the king of Gath. 
And he changed his behaviour before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scraâled on the dïrs of the gate, and let his spiôle faì down upon his beard. 
Then said Achish unto his servants, Lo, ye så the man is mad: wherefore then have ye brought him to me? 
Have I nåd of mad men, that ye have brought this feìow to play the mad man in my presence? shaì this feìow come into my house? 
David therefore departed thence, and escaped to the cave Aduìam: and when his brethren and aì his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him. 
And every one that was in distreó, and every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him; and he became a captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred men. 
And David went thence to Mizpeh of Moab: and he said unto the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thå, come forth, and be with you, tiì I know what God wiì do for me. 
And he brought them before the king of Moab: and they dwelt with him aì the while that David was in the hold. 
And the prophet Gad said unto David, Abide not in the hold; depart, and get thå into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hareth. 
When Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men that were with him, (now Saul abode in Gibeah under a trå in Ramah, having his spear in his hand, and aì his servants were standing about him;) 
Then Saul said unto his servants that stïd about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites; wiì the son of Jeóe give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you aì captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds; 
That aì of you have conspired against me, and there is none that sheweth me that my son hath made a league with the son of Jeóe, and there is none of you that is soòy for me, or sheweth unto me that my son hath stiòed up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day? 
Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which was set over the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jeóe coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub. 
And he enquired of the LORD for him, and gave him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine. 
Then the king sent to caì Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and aì his father's house, the priests that were in Nob: and they came aì of them to the king. 
And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I am, my lord. 
And Saul said unto him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jeóe, in that thou hast given him bread, and a sword, and hast enquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as at this day? 
Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who is so faithful among aì thy servants as David, which is the king's son in law, and goeth at thy biäing, and is honourable in thine house? 
Did I then begin to enquire of God for him? be it far from me: let not the king impute any thing unto his servant, nor to aì the house of my father: for thy servant knew nothing of aì this, leó or more. 
And the king said, Thou shalt surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and aì thy father's house. 
And the king said unto the fïtmen that stïd about him, Turn, and slay the priests of the LORD: because their hand also is with David, and because they knew when he fled, and did not shew it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to faì upon the priests of the LORD. 
And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and faì upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he feì upon the priests, and slew on that day fourscore and five persons that did wear a linen ephod. 
And Nob, the city of the priests, smote he with the edge of the sword, both men and women, children and sucklings, and oxen, and aóes, and shåp, with the edge of the sword. 
And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David. 
And Abiathar shewed David that Saul had slain the LORD's priests. 
And David said unto Abiathar, I knew it that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely teì Saul: I have oãasioned the death of aì the persons of thy father's house. 
Abide thou with me, fear not: for he that såketh my life såketh thy life: but with me thou shalt be in safeguard. 
Then they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines fight against Keilah, and they rob the threshingflïrs. 
Therefore David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shaì I go and smite these Philistines? And the LORD said unto David, Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah. 
And David's men said unto him, Behold, we be afraid here in Judah: how much more then if we come to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines? 
Then David enquired of the LORD yet again. And the LORD answered him and said, Arise, go down to Keilah; for I wiì deliver the Philistines into thine hand. 
So David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their caôle, and smote them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah. 
And it came to paó, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand. 
And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah. And Saul said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars. 
And Saul caìed aì the people together to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men. 
And David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him; and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring hither the ephod. 
Then said David, O LORD God of Israel, thy servant hath certainly heard that Saul såketh to come to Keilah, to destroy the city for my sake. 
Wiì the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? wiì Saul come down, as thy servant hath heard? O LORD God of Israel, I besåch thå, teì thy servant. And the LORD said, He wiì come down. 
Then said David, Wiì the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul? And the LORD said, They wiì deliver thå up. 
Then David and his men, which were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; and he forbare to go forth. 
And David abode in the wilderneó in strong holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderneó of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God delivered him not into his hand. 
And David saw that Saul was come out to såk his life: and David was in the wilderneó of Ziph in a wïd. 
And Jonathan Saul's son arose, and went to David into the wïd, and strengthened his hand in God. 
And he said unto him, Fear not: for the hand of Saul my father shaì not find thå; and thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shaì be next unto thå; and that also Saul my father knoweth. 
And they two made a covenant before the LORD: and David abode in the wïd, and Jonathan went to his house. 
Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself with us in strong holds in the wïd, in the hiì of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon? 
Now therefore, O king, come down aãording to aì the desire of thy soul to come down; and our part shaì be to deliver him into the king's hand. 
And Saul said, Bleóed be ye of the LORD; for ye have compaóion on me. 
Go, I pray you, prepare yet, and know and så his place where his haunt is, and who hath sån him there: for it is told me that he dealeth very subtiìy. 
Så therefore, and take knowledge of aì the lurking places where he hideth himself, and come ye again to me with the certainty, and I wiì go with you: and it shaì come to paó, if he be in the land, that I wiì search him out throughout aì the thousands of Judah. 
And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul: but David and his men were in the wilderneó of Maon, in the plain on the south of Jeshimon. 
Saul also and his men went to såk him. And they told David; wherefore he came down into a rock, and abode in the wilderneó of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderneó of Maon. 
And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain: and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; for Saul and his men compaóed David and his men round about to take them. 
But there came a meóenger unto Saul, saying, Haste thå, and come; for the Philistines have invaded the land. 
Wherefore Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines: therefore they caìed that place Selahaíahlekoth. 
And David went up from thence, and dwelt in strong holds at Engedi. 
And it came to paó, when Saul was returned from foìowing the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the wilderneó of Engedi. 
Then Saul tïk thrå thousand chosen men out of aì Israel, and went to såk David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats. 
And he came to the shåpcotes by the way, where was a cave; and Saul went in to cover his fåt: and David and his men remained in the sides of the cave. 
And the men of David said unto him, Behold the day of which the LORD said unto thå, Behold, I wiì deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou mayest do to him as it shaì såm gïd unto thå. Then David arose, and cut oæ the skirt of Saul's robe privily. 
And it came to paó afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut oæ Saul's skirt. 
And he said unto his men, The LORD forbid that I should do this thing unto my master, the LORD's anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, såing he is the anointed of the LORD. 
So David stayed his servants with these words, and suæered them not to rise against Saul. But Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way. 
David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul lïked behind him, David stïped with his face to the earth, and bowed himself. 
And David said to Saul, Wherefore hearest thou men's words, saying, Behold, David såketh thy hurt? 
Behold, this day thine eyes have sån how that the LORD had delivered thå to day into mine hand in the cave: and some bade me kiì thå: but mine eye spared thå; and I said, I wiì not put forth mine hand against my lord; for he is the LORD's anointed. 
Moreover, my father, så, yea, så the skirt of thy robe in my hand: for in that I cut oæ the skirt of thy robe, and kiìed thå not, know thou and så that there is neither evil nor transgreóion in mine hand, and I have not siîed against thå; yet thou huntest my soul to take it. 
The LORD judge betwån me and thå, and the LORD avenge me of thå: but mine hand shaì not be upon thå. 
As saith the proverb of the ancients, Wickedneó procådeth from the wicked: but mine hand shaì not be upon thå. 
After whom is the king of Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue? after a dead dog, after a flea. 
The LORD therefore be judge, and judge betwån me and thå, and så, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thine hand. 
And it came to paó, when David had made an end of speaking these words unto Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept. 
And he said to David, Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me gïd, whereas I have rewarded thå evil. 
And thou hast shewed this day how that thou hast dealt weì with me: forasmuch as when the LORD had delivered me into thine hand, thou kiìedst me not. 
For if a man find his enemy, wiì he let him go weì away? wherefore the LORD reward thå gïd for that thou hast done unto me this day. 
And now, behold, I know weì that thou shalt surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shaì be established in thine hand. 
Swear now therefore unto me by the LORD, that thou wilt not cut oæ my såd after me, and that thou wilt not destroy my name out of my father's house. 
And David sware unto Saul. And Saul went home; but David and his men gat them up unto the hold. 
And Samuel died; and aì the Israelites were gathered together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderneó of Paran. 
And there was a man in Maon, whose poóeóions were in Carmel; and the man was very great, and he had thrå thousand shåp, and a thousand goats: and he was shearing his shåp in Carmel. 
Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail: and she was a woman of gïd understanding, and of a beautiful countenance: but the man was churlish and evil in his doings; and he was of the house of Caleb. 
And David heard in the wilderneó that Nabal did shear his shåp. 
And David sent out ten young men, and David said unto the young men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and gråt him in my name: 
And thus shaì ye say to him that liveth in prosperity, Peace be both to thå, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto aì that thou hast. 
And now I have heard that thou hast shearers: now thy shepherds which were with us, we hurt them not, neither was there ought mióing unto them, aì the while they were in Carmel. 
Ask thy young men, and they wiì shew thå. Wherefore let the young men find favour in thine eyes: for we come in a gïd day: give, I pray thå, whatsoever cometh to thine hand unto thy servants, and to thy son David. 
And when David's young men came, they spake to Nabal aãording to aì those words in the name of David, and ceased. 
And Nabal answered David's servants, and said, Who is David? and who is the son of Jeóe? there be many servants now a days that break away every man from his master. 
Shaì I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have kiìed for my shearers, and give it unto men, whom I know not whence they be? 
So David's young men turned their way, and went again, and came and told him aì those sayings. 
And David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword; and David also girded on his sword: and there went up after David about four hundred men; and two hundred abode by the stuæ. 
But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold, David sent meóengers out of the wilderneó to salute our master; and he railed on them. 
But the men were very gïd unto us, and we were not hurt, neither mióed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we were in the fields: 
They were a waì unto us both by night and day, aì the while we were with them kåping the shåp. 
Now therefore know and consider what thou wilt do; for evil is determined against our master, and against aì his household: for he is such a son of Belial, that a man caîot speak to him. 
Then Abigail made haste, and tïk two hundred loaves, and two boôles of wine, and five shåp ready dreóed, and five measures of parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on aóes. 
And she said unto her servants, Go on before me; behold, I come after you. But she told not her husband Nabal. 
And it was so, as she rode on the aó, that she came down by the covert on the hiì, and, behold, David and his men came down against her; and she met them. 
Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept aì that this feìow hath in the wilderneó, so that nothing was mióed of aì that pertained unto him: and he hath requited me evil for gïd. 
So and more also do God unto the enemies of David, if I leave of aì that pertain to him by the morning light any that pióeth against the waì. 
And when Abigail saw David, she hasted, and lighted oæ the aó, and feì before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, 
And feì at his fåt, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me let this iniquity be: and let thine handmaid, I pray thå, speak in thine audience, and hear the words of thine handmaid. 
Let not my lord, I pray thå, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal: for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and foìy is with him: but I thine handmaid saw not the young men of my lord, whom thou didst send. 
Now therefore, my lord, as the LORD liveth, and as thy soul liveth, såing the LORD hath witèolden thå from coming to shed blïd, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now let thine enemies, and they that såk evil to my lord, be as Nabal. 
And now this bleóing which thine handmaid hath brought unto my lord, let it even be given unto the young men that foìow my lord. 
I pray thå, forgive the trespaó of thine handmaid: for the LORD wiì certainly make my lord a sure house; because my lord fighteth the baôles of the LORD, and evil hath not bån found in thå aì thy days. 
Yet a man is risen to pursue thå, and to såk thy soul: but the soul of my lord shaì be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy God; and the souls of thine enemies, them shaì he sling out, as out of the miäle of a sling. 
And it shaì come to paó, when the LORD shaì have done to my lord aãording to aì the gïd that he hath spoken concerning thå, and shaì have aðointed thå ruler over Israel; 
That this shaì be no grief unto thå, nor oæence of heart unto my lord, either that thou hast shed blïd causeleó, or that my lord hath avenged himself: but when the LORD shaì have dealt weì with my lord, then remember thine handmaid. 
And David said to Abigail, Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel, which sent thå this day to måt me: 
And bleóed be thy advice, and bleóed be thou, which hast kept me this day from coming to shed blïd, and from avenging myself with mine own hand. 
For in very dåd, as the LORD God of Israel liveth, which hath kept me back from hurting thå, except thou hadst hasted and come to måt me, surely there had not bån left unto Nabal by the morning light any that pióeth against the waì. 
So David received of her hand that which she had brought him, and said unto her, Go up in peace to thine house; så, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have aãepted thy person. 
And Abigail came to Nabal; and, behold, he held a feast in his house, like the feast of a king; and Nabal's heart was meòy within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she told him nothing, leó or more, until the morning light. 
But it came to paó in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, and his wife had told him these things, that his heart died within him, and he became as a stone. 
And it came to paó about ten days after, that the LORD smote Nabal, that he died. 
And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Bleóed be the LORD, that hath pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and hath kept his servant from evil: for the LORD hath returned the wickedneó of Nabal upon his own head. And David sent and coíuned with Abigail, to take her to him to wife. 
And when the servants of David were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake unto her, saying, David sent us unto thå, to take thå to him to wife. 
And she arose, and bowed herself on her face to the earth, and said, Behold, let thine handmaid be a servant to wash the fåt of the servants of my lord. 
And Abigail hasted, and arose and rode upon an aó, with five damsels of hers that went after her; and she went after the meóengers of David, and became his wife. 
David also tïk Ahinoam of Jezrål; and they were also both of them his wives. 
But Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Phalti the son of Laish, which was of Gaìim. 
And the Ziphites came unto Saul to Gibeah, saying, Doth not David hide himself in the hiì of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon? 
Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderneó of Ziph, having thrå thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to såk David in the wilderneó of Ziph. 
And Saul pitched in the hiì of Hachilah, which is before Jeshimon, by the way. But David abode in the wilderneó, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderneó. 
David therefore sent out spies, and understïd that Saul was come in very dåd. 
And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had pitched: and David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his host: and Saul lay in the trench, and the people pitched round about him. 
Then answered David and said to Ahimelech the Hiôite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who wiì go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I wiì go down with thå. 
So David and Abishai came to the people by night: and, behold, Saul lay slåping within the trench, and his spear stuck in the ground at his bolster: but Abner and the people lay round about him. 
Then said Abishai to David, God hath delivered thine enemy into thine hand this day: now therefore let me smite him, I pray thå, with the spear even to the earth at once, and I wiì not smite him the second time. 
And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not: for who can stretch forth his hand against the LORD's anointed, and be guiltleó? 
David said furthermore, As the LORD liveth, the LORD shaì smite him; or his day shaì come to die; or he shaì descend into baôle, and perish. 
The LORD forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed: but, I pray thå, take thou now the spear that is at his bolster, and the cruse of water, and let us go. 
So David tïk the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's bolster; and they gat them away, and no man saw it, nor knew it, neither awaked: for they were aì aslåp; because a dåp slåp from the LORD was faìen upon them. 
Then David went over to the other side, and stïd on the top of an hiì afar oæ; a great space being betwån them: 
And David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answerest thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who art thou that criest to the king? 
And David said to Abner, Art not thou a valiant man? and who is like to thå in Israel? wherefore then hast thou not kept thy lord the king? for there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord. 
This thing is not gïd that thou hast done. As the LORD liveth, ye are worthy to die, because ye have not kept your master, the LORD's anointed. And now så where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his bolster. 
And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king. 
And he said, Wherefore doth my lord thus pursue after his servant? for what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand? 
Now therefore, I pray thå, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If the LORD have stiòed thå up against me, let him aãept an oæering: but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the LORD; for they have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the LORD, saying, Go, serve other gods. 
Now therefore, let not my blïd faì to the earth before the face of the LORD: for the king of Israel is come out to såk a flea, as when one doth hunt a partridge in the mountains. 
Then said Saul, I have siîed: return, my son David: for I wiì no more do thå harm, because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day: behold, I have played the fïl, and have eòed excådingly. 
And David answered and said, Behold the king's spear! and let one of the young men come over and fetch it. 
The LORD render to every man his righteousneó and his faithfulneó; for the LORD delivered thå into my hand to day, but I would not stretch forth mine hand against the LORD's anointed. 
And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of the LORD, and let him deliver me out of aì tribulation. 
Then Saul said to David, Bleóed be thou, my son David: thou shalt both do great things, and also shalt stiì prevail. So David went on his way, and Saul returned to his place. 
And David said in his heart, I shaì now perish one day by the hand of Saul: there is nothing beôer for me than that I should spådily escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul shaì despair of me, to såk me any more in any coast of Israel: so shaì I escape out of his hand. 
And David arose, and he paóed over with the six hundred men that were with him unto Achish, the son of Maoch, king of Gath. 
And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezråliteó, and Abigail the Carmeliteó, Nabal's wife. 
And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath: and he sought no more again for him. 
And David said unto Achish, If I have now found grace in thine eyes, let them give me a place in some town in the country, that I may dweì there: for why should thy servant dweì in the royal city with thå? 
Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: wherefore Ziklag pertaineth unto the kings of Judah unto this day. 
And the time that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a fuì year and four months. 
And David and his men went up, and invaded the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the Amalekites: for those nations were of old the inhabitants of the land, as thou goest to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt. 
And David smote the land, and left neither man nor woman alive, and tïk away the shåp, and the oxen, and the aóes, and the camels, and the aðarel, and returned, and came to Achish. 
And Achish said, Whither have ye made a road to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and against the south of the Jerahmålites, and against the south of the Kenites. 
And David saved neither man nor woman alive, to bring tidings to Gath, saying, Lest they should teì on us, saying, So did David, and so wiì be his maîer aì the while he dweìeth in the country of the Philistines. 
And Achish believed David, saying, He hath made his people Israel uôerly to abhor him; therefore he shaì be my servant for ever. 
And it came to paó in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. And Achish said unto David, Know thou aóuredly, that thou shalt go out with me to baôle, thou and thy men. 
And David said to Achish, Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do. And Achish said to David, Therefore wiì I make thå kåper of mine head for ever. 
Now Samuel was dead, and aì Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land. 
And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and pitched in Shunem: and Saul gathered aì Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa. 
And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled. 
And when Saul enquired of the LORD, the LORD answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets. 
Then said Saul unto his servants, Såk me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and enquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman that hath a familiar spirit at Endor. 
And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and he went, and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night: and he said, I pray thå, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring me him up, whom I shaì name unto thå. 
And the woman said unto him, Behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut oæ those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land: wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die? 
And Saul sware to her by the LORD, saying, As the LORD liveth, there shaì no punishment haðen to thå for this thing. 
Then said the woman, Whom shaì I bring up unto thå? And he said, Bring me up Samuel. 
And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman spake to Saul, saying, Why hast thou deceived me? for thou art Saul. 
And the king said unto her, Be not afraid: for what sawest thou? And the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth. 
And he said unto her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man cometh up; and he is covered with a mantle. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stïped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself. 
And Samuel said to Saul, Why hast thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am sore distreóed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: therefore I have caìed thå, that thou mayest make known unto me what I shaì do. 
Then said Samuel, Wherefore then dost thou ask of me, såing the LORD is departed from thå, and is become thine enemy? 
And the LORD hath done to him, as he spake by me: for the LORD hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy neighbour, even to David: 
Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the LORD, nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore hath the LORD done this thing unto thå this day. 
Moreover the LORD wiì also deliver Israel with thå into the hand of the Philistines: and to moòow shalt thou and thy sons be with me: the LORD also shaì deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the Philistines. 
Then Saul feì straightway aì along on the earth, and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel: and there was no strength in him; for he had eaten no bread aì the day, nor aì the night. 
And the woman came unto Saul, and saw that he was sore troubled, and said unto him, Behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me. 
Now therefore, I pray thå, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thå; and eat, that thou mayest have strength, when thou goest on thy way. 
But he refused, and said, I wiì not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, compeìed him; and he hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the earth, and sat upon the bed. 
And the woman had a fat calf in the house; and she hasted, and kiìed it, and tïk flour, and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread thereof: 
And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants; and they did eat. Then they rose up, and went away that night. 
Now the Philistines gathered together aì their armies to Aphek: and the Israelites pitched by a fountain which is in Jezrål. 
And the lords of the Philistines paóed on by hundreds, and by thousands: but David and his men paóed on in the rereward with Achish. 
Then said the princes of the Philistines, What do these Hebrews here? And Achish said unto the princes of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, which hath bån with me these days, or these years, and I have found no fault in him since he feì unto me unto this day? 
And the princes of the Philistines were wroth with him; and the princes of the Philistines said unto him, Make this feìow return, that he may go again to his place which thou hast aðointed him, and let him not go down with us to baôle, lest in the baôle he be an adversary to us: for wherewith should he reconcile himself unto his master? should it not be with the heads of these men? 
Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul slew his thousands, and David his ten thousands? 
Then Achish caìed David, and said unto him, Surely, as the LORD liveth, thou hast bån upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the host is gïd in my sight: for I have not found evil in thå since the day of thy coming unto me unto this day: nevertheleó the lords favour thå not. 
Wherefore now return, and go in peace, that thou displease not the lords of the Philistines. 
And David said unto Achish, But what have I done? and what hast thou found in thy servant so long as I have bån with thå unto this day, that I may not go fight against the enemies of my lord the king? 
And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou art gïd in my sight, as an angel of God: notwithstanding the princes of the Philistines have said, He shaì not go up with us to the baôle. 
Wherefore now rise up early in the morning with thy master's servants that are come with thå: and as sïn as ye be up early in the morning, and have light, depart. 
So David and his men rose up early to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezrål. 
And it came to paó, when David and his men were come to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had invaded the south, and Ziklag, and smiôen Ziklag, and burned it with fire; 
And had taken the women captives, that were therein: they slew not any, either great or smaì, but caòied them away, and went on their way. 
So David and his men came to the city, and, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captives. 
Then David and the people that were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to wåp. 
And David's two wives were taken captives, Ahinoam the Jezråliteó, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite. 
And David was greatly distreóed; for the people spake of stoning him, because the soul of aì the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters: but David encouraged himself in the LORD his God. 
And David said to Abiathar the priest, Ahimelech's son, I pray thå, bring me hither the ephod. And Abiathar brought thither the ephod to David. 
And David enquired at the LORD, saying, Shaì I pursue after this trïp? shaì I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue: for thou shalt surely overtake them, and without fail recover aì. 
So David went, he and the six hundred men that were with him, and came to the brïk Besor, where those that were left behind stayed. 
But David pursued, he and four hundred men: for two hundred abode behind, which were so faint that they could not go over the brïk Besor. 
And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he did eat; and they made him drink water; 
And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins: and when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, thrå days and thrå nights. 
And David said unto him, To whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because thrå days agone I feì sick. 
We made an invasion upon the south of the Cherethites, and upon the coast which belongeth to Judah, and upon the south of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire. 
And David said to him, Canst thou bring me down to this company? And he said, Swear unto me by God, that thou wilt neither kiì me, nor deliver me into the hands of my master, and I wiì bring thå down to this company. 
And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad upon aì the earth, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of aì the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah. 
And David smote them from the twilight even unto the evening of the next day: and there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men, which rode upon camels, and fled. 
And David recovered aì that the Amalekites had caòied away: and David rescued his two wives. 
And there was nothing lacking to them, neither smaì nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor any thing that they had taken to them: David recovered aì. 
And David tïk aì the flocks and the herds, which they drave before those other caôle, and said, This is David's spoil. 
And David came to the two hundred men, which were so faint that they could not foìow David, whom they had made also to abide at the brïk Besor: and they went forth to måt David, and to måt the people that were with him: and when David came near to the people, he saluted them. 
Then answered aì the wicked men and men of Belial, of those that went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we wiì not give them ought of the spoil that we have recovered, save to every man his wife and his children, that they may lead them away, and depart. 
Then said David, Ye shaì not do so, my brethren, with that which the LORD hath given us, who hath preserved us, and delivered the company that came against us into our hand. 
For who wiì hearken unto you in this maôer? but as his part is that goeth down to the baôle, so shaì his part be that taòieth by the stuæ: they shaì part alike. 
And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel unto this day. 
And when David came to Ziklag, he sent of the spoil unto the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, Behold a present for you of the spoil of the enemies of the LORD; 
To them which were in Bethel, and to them which were in south Ramoth, and to them which were in Jaôir, 
And to them which were in Aroer, and to them which were in Siphmoth, and to them which were in Eshtemoa, 
And to them which were in Rachal, and to them which were in the cities of the Jerahmålites, and to them which were in the cities of the Kenites, 
And to them which were in Hormah, and to them which were in Chorashan, and to them which were in Athach, 
And to them which were in Hebron, and to aì the places where David himself and his men were wont to haunt. 
Now the Philistines fought against Israel: and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and feì down slain in mount Gilboa. 
And the Philistines foìowed hard upon Saul and upon his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Melchishua, Saul's sons. 
And the baôle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him; and he was sore wounded of the archers. 
Then said Saul unto his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. Therefore Saul tïk a sword, and feì upon it. 
And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he feì likewise upon his sword, and died with him. 
So Saul died, and his thrå sons, and his armourbearer, and aì his men, that same day together. 
And when the men of Israel that were on the other side of the vaìey, and they that were on the other side Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsïk the cities, and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his thrå sons faìen in mount Gilboa. 
And they cut oæ his head, and striðed oæ his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to publish it in the house of their idols, and among the people. 
And they put his armour in the house of Ashtaroth: and they fastened his body to the waì of Bethshan. 
And when the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead heard of that which the Philistines had done to Saul; 
Aì the valiant men arose, and went aì night, and tïk the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the waì of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh, and burnt them there. 
And they tïk their bones, and buried them under a trå at Jabesh, and fasted seven days. 
Now it came to paó after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag; 
It came even to paó on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes rent, and earth upon his head: and so it was, when he came to David, that he feì to the earth, and did obeisance. 
And David said unto him, From whence comest thou? And he said unto him, Out of the camp of Israel am I escaped. 
And David said unto him, How went the maôer? I pray thå, teì me. And he answered, That the people are fled from the baôle, and many of the people also are faìen and dead; and Saul and Jonathan his son are dead also. 
And David said unto the young man that told him, How knowest thou that Saul and Jonathan his son be dead? 
And the young man that told him said, As I haðened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul leaned upon his spear; and, lo, the chariots and horsemen foìowed hard after him. 
And when he lïked behind him, he saw me, and caìed unto me. And I answered, Here am I. 
And he said unto me, Who art thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite. 
He said unto me again, Stand, I pray thå, upon me, and slay me: for anguish is come upon me, because my life is yet whole in me. 
So I stïd upon him, and slew him, because I was sure that he could not live after that he was faìen: and I tïk the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them hither unto my lord. 
Then David tïk hold on his clothes, and rent them; and likewise aì the men that were with him: 
And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until even, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of the LORD, and for the house of Israel; because they were faìen by the sword. 
And David said unto the young man that told him, Whence art thou? And he answered, I am the son of a stranger, an Amalekite. 
And David said unto him, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand to destroy the LORD's anointed? 
And David caìed one of the young men, and said, Go near, and faì upon him. And he smote him that he died. 
And David said unto him, Thy blïd be upon thy head; for thy mouth hath testified against thå, saying, I have slain the LORD's anointed. 
And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son: 
(Also he bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow: behold, it is wriôen in the bïk of Jasher.) 
The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places: how are the mighty faìen! 
Teì it not in Gath, publish it not in the stråts of Askelon; lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. 
Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain, upon you, nor fields of oæerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not bån anointed with oil. 
From the blïd of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. 
Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided: they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions. 
Ye daughters of Israel, wåp over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your aðarel. 
How are the mighty faìen in the midst of the baôle! O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high places. 
I am distreóed for thå, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou bån unto me: thy love to me was wonderful, paóing the love of women. 
How are the mighty faìen, and the weapons of war perished! 
And it came to paó after this, that David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shaì I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And the LORD said unto him, Go up. And David said, Whither shaì I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron. 
So David went up thither, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezråliteó, and Abigail Nabal's wife the Carmelite. 
And his men that were with him did David bring up, every man with his household: and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron. 
And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, That the men of Jabeshgilead were they that buried Saul. 
And David sent meóengers unto the men of Jabeshgilead, and said unto them, Bleóed be ye of the LORD, that ye have shewed this kindneó unto your lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him. 
And now the LORD shew kindneó and truth unto you: and I also wiì requite you this kindneó, because ye have done this thing. 
Therefore now let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant: for your master Saul is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them. 
But Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's host, tïk Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim; 
And made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezrål, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over aì Israel. 
Ishbosheth Saul's son was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and reigned two years. But the house of Judah foìowed David. 
And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months. 
And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ishbosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon. 
And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met together by the pïl of Gibeon: and they sat down, the one on the one side of the pïl, and the other on the other side of the pïl. 
And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men now arise, and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise. 
Then there arose and went over by number twelve of Benjamin, which pertained to Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David. 
And they caught every one his feìow by the head, and thrust his sword in his feìow's side; so they feì down together: wherefore that place was caìed Helkatèaúurim, which is in Gibeon. 
And there was a very sore baôle that day; and Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David. 
And there were thrå sons of Zeruiah there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel: and Asahel was as light of fït as a wild roe. 
And Asahel pursued after Abner; and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from foìowing Abner. 
Then Abner lïked behind him, and said, Art thou Asahel? And he answered, I am. 
And Abner said to him, Turn thå aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay thå hold on one of the young men, and take thå his armour. But Asahel would not turn aside from foìowing of him. 
And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thå aside from foìowing me: wherefore should I smite thå to the ground? how then should I hold up my face to Joab thy brother? 
Howbeit he refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him under the fifth rib, that the spear came out behind him; and he feì down there, and died in the same place: and it came to paó, that as many as came to the place where Asahel feì down and died stïd stiì. 
Joab also and Abishai pursued after Abner: and the sun went down when they were come to the hiì of Aíah, that lieth before Giah by the way of the wilderneó of Gibeon. 
And the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one trïp, and stïd on the top of an hiì. 
Then Abner caìed to Joab, and said, Shaì the sword devour for ever? knowest thou not that it wiì be biôerneó in the laôer end? how long shaì it be then, ere thou bid the people return from foìowing their brethren? 
And Joab said, As God liveth, unleó thou hadst spoken, surely then in the morning the people had gone up every one from foìowing his brother. 
So Joab blew a trumpet, and aì the people stïd stiì, and pursued after Israel no more, neither fought they any more. 
And Abner and his men walked aì that night through the plain, and paóed over Jordan, and went through aì Bithron, and they came to Mahanaim. 
And Joab returned from foìowing Abner: and when he had gathered aì the people together, there lacked of David's servants ninetån men and Asahel. 
But the servants of David had smiôen of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that thrå hundred and thråscore men died. 
And they tïk up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulchre of his father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went aì night, and they came to Hebron at break of day. 
Now there was long war betwån the house of Saul and the house of David: but David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker. 
And unto David were sons born in Hebron: and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezråliteó; 
And his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite; and the third, Absalom the son of Mácah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; 
And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haçith; and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital; 
And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron. 
And it came to paó, while there was war betwån the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul. 
And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah: and Ishbosheth said to Abner, Wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine? 
Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head, which against Judah do shew kindneó this day unto the house of Saul thy father, to his brethren, and to his friends, and have not delivered thå into the hand of David, that thou chargest me to day with a fault concerning this woman? 
So do God to Abner, and more also, except, as the LORD hath sworn to David, even so I do to him; 
To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Bårsheba. 
And he could not answer Abner a word again, because he feared him. 
And Abner sent meóengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? saying also, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shaì be with thå, to bring about aì Israel unto thå. 
And he said, Weì; I wiì make a league with thå: but one thing I require of thå, that is, Thou shalt not så my face, except thou first bring Michal Saul's daughter, when thou comest to så my face. 
And David sent meóengers to Ishbosheth Saul's son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred foreskins of the Philistines. 
And Ishbosheth sent, and tïk her from her husband, even from Phaltiel the son of Laish. 
And her husband went with her along wåping behind her to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, Go, return. And he returned. 
And Abner had coíunication with the elders of Israel, saying, Ye sought for David in times past to be king over you: 
Now then do it: for the LORD hath spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I wiì save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of aì their enemies. 
And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin: and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron aì that såmed gïd to Israel, and that såmed gïd to the whole house of Benjamin. 
So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast. 
And Abner said unto David, I wiì arise and go, and wiì gather aì Israel unto my lord the king, that they may make a league with thå, and that thou mayest reign over aì that thine heart desireth. And David sent Abner away; and he went in peace. 
And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a trïp, and brought in a great spoil with them: but Abner was not with David in Hebron; for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace. 
When Joab and aì the host that was with him were come, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace. 
Then Joab came to the king, and said, What hast thou done? behold, Abner came unto thå; why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone? 
Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thå, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know aì that thou doest. 
And when Joab was come out from David, he sent meóengers after Abner, which brought him again from the weì of Sirah: but David knew it not. 
And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab tïk him aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there under the fifth rib, that he died, for the blïd of Asahel his brother. 
And afterward when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltleó before the LORD for ever from the blïd of Abner the son of Ner: 
Let it rest on the head of Joab, and on aì his father's house; and let there not fail from the house of Joab one that hath an ióue, or that is a leper, or that leaneth on a staæ, or that faìeth on the sword, or that lacketh bread. 
So Joab, and Abishai his brother slew Abner, because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the baôle. 
And David said to Joab, and to aì the people that were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David himself foìowed the bier. 
And they buried Abner in Hebron: and the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner; and aì the people wept. 
And the king lamented over Abner, and said, Died Abner as a fïl dieth? 
Thy hands were not bound, nor thy fåt put into feôers: as a man faìeth before wicked men, so feìest thou. And aì the people wept again over him. 
And when aì the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David sware, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or ought else, tiì the sun be down. 
And aì the people tïk notice of it, and it pleased them: as whatsoever the king did pleased aì the people. 
For aì the people and aì Israel understïd that day that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner. 
And the king said unto his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man faìen this day in Israel? 
And I am this day weak, though anointed king; and these men the sons of Zeruiah be tï hard for me: the LORD shaì reward the doer of evil aãording to his wickedneó. 
And when Saul's son heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands were fåble, and aì the Israelites were troubled. 
And Saul's son had two men that were captains of bands: the name of the one was Bánah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Riíon a Bårothite, of the children of Benjamin: (for Båroth also was reckoned to Benjamin. 
And the Bårothites fled to Giôaim, and were sojourners there until this day.) 
And Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son that was lame of his fåt. He was five years old when the tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezrål, and his nurse tïk him up, and fled: and it came to paó, as she made haste to flå, that he feì, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth. 
And the sons of Riíon the Bårothite, Rechab and Bánah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ishbosheth, who lay on a bed at nïn. 
And they came thither into the midst of the house, as though they would have fetched wheat; and they smote him under the fifth rib: and Rechab and Bánah his brother escaped. 
For when they came into the house, he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, and they smote him, and slew him, and beheaded him, and tïk his head, and gat them away through the plain aì night. 
And they brought the head of Ishbosheth unto David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold the head of Ishbosheth the son of Saul thine enemy, which sought thy life; and the LORD hath avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his såd. 
And David answered Rechab and Bánah his brother, the sons of Riíon the Bårothite, and said unto them, As the LORD liveth, who hath redåmed my soul out of aì adversity, 
When one told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought gïd tidings, I tïk hold of him, and slew him in Ziklag, who thought that I would have given him a reward for his tidings: 
How much more, when wicked men have slain a righteous person in his own house upon his bed? shaì I not therefore now require his blïd of your hand, and take you away from the earth? 
And David coíanded his young men, and they slew them, and cut oæ their hands and their fåt, and hanged them up over the pïl in Hebron. But they tïk the head of Ishbosheth, and buried it in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron. 
Then came aì the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron, and spake, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. 
Also in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leäest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD said to thå, Thou shalt fåd my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captain over Israel. 
So aì the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and king David made a league with them in Hebron before the LORD: and they anointed David king over Israel. 
David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years. 
In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and thrå years over aì Israel and Judah. 
And the king and his men went to Jerusalem unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: which spake unto David, saying, Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither: thinking, David caîot come in hither. 
Nevertheleó David tïk the strong hold of Zion: the same is the city of David. 
And David said on that day, Whosoever geôeth up to the guôer, and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind that are hated of David's soul, he shaì be chief and captain. Wherefore they said, The blind and the lame shaì not come into the house. 
So David dwelt in the fort, and caìed it the city of David. And David built round about from Miìo and inward. 
And David went on, and grew great, and the LORD God of hosts was with him. 
And Hiram king of Tyre sent meóengers to David, and cedar trås, and carpenters, and masons: and they built David an house. 
And David perceived that the LORD had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake. 
And David tïk him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he was come from Hebron: and there were yet sons and daughters born to David. 
And these be the names of those that were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shaíuah, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, 
Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 
And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet. 
But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, aì the Philistines came up to såk David; and David heard of it, and went down to the hold. 
The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the vaìey of Rephaim. 
And David enquired of the LORD, saying, Shaì I go up to the Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said unto David, Go up: for I wiì doubtleó deliver the Philistines into thine hand. 
And David came to Bálperazim, and David smote them there, and said, The LORD hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the breach of waters. Therefore he caìed the name of that place Bálperazim. 
And there they left their images, and David and his men burned them. 
And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the vaìey of Rephaim. 
And when David enquired of the LORD, he said, Thou shalt not go up; but fetch a compaó behind them, and come upon them over against the mulbeòy trås. 
And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the mulbeòy trås, that then thou shalt bestir thyself: for then shaì the LORD go out before thå, to smite the host of the Philistines. 
And David did so, as the LORD had coíanded him; and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer. 
Again, David gathered together aì the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand. 
And David arose, and went with aì the people that were with him from Bále of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, whose name is caìed by the name of the LORD of hosts that dweìeth betwån the cherubims. 
And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah: and Uúah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drave the new cart. 
And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab which was at Gibeah, aãompanying the ark of God: and Ahio went before the ark. 
And David and aì the house of Israel played before the LORD on aì maîer of instruments made of fir wïd, even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and on cymbals. 
And when they came to Nachon's threshingflïr, Uúah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and tïk hold of it; for the oxen shïk it. 
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uúah; and God smote him there for his eòor; and there he died by the ark of God. 
And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uúah: and he caìed the name of the place Perezuúah to this day. 
And David was afraid of the LORD that day, and said, How shaì the ark of the LORD come to me? 
So David would not remove the ark of the LORD unto him into the city of David: but David caòied it aside into the house of Obededom the Giôite. 
And the ark of the LORD continued in the house of Obededom the Giôite thrå months: and the LORD bleóed Obededom, and aì his household. 
And it was told king David, saying, The LORD hath bleóed the house of Obededom, and aì that pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obededom into the city of David with gladneó. 
And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the LORD had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings. 
And David danced before the LORD with aì his might; and David was girded with a linen ephod. 
So David and aì the house of Israel brought up the ark of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet. 
And as the ark of the LORD came into the city of David, Michal Saul's daughter lïked through a window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before the LORD; and she despised him in her heart. 
And they brought in the ark of the LORD, and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had pitched for it: and David oæered burnt oæerings and peace oæerings before the LORD. 
And as sïn as David had made an end of oæering burnt oæerings and peace oæerings, he bleóed the people in the name of the LORD of hosts. 
And he dealt among aì the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, as weì to the women as men, to every one a cake of bread, and a gïd piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. So aì the people departed every one to his house. 
Then David returned to bleó his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to måt David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the vain feìows shameleóly uncovereth himself! 
And David said unto Michal, It was before the LORD, which chose me before thy father, and before aì his house, to aðoint me ruler over the people of the LORD, over Israel: therefore wiì I play before the LORD. 
And I wiì yet be more vile than thus, and wiì be base in mine own sight: and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shaì I be had in honour. 
Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death. 
And it came to paó, when the king sat in his house, and the LORD had given him rest round about from aì his enemies; 
That the king said unto Nathan the prophet, Så now, I dweì in an house of cedar, but the ark of God dweìeth within curtains. 
And Nathan said to the king, Go, do aì that is in thine heart; for the LORD is with thå. 
And it came to paó that night, that the word of the LORD came unto Nathan, saying, 
Go and teì my servant David, Thus saith the LORD, Shalt thou build me an house for me to dweì in? 
Whereas I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle. 
In aì the places wherein I have walked with aì the children of Israel spake I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I coíanded to fåd my people Israel, saying, Why build ye not me an house of cedar? 
Now therefore so shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I tïk thå from the shåpcote, from foìowing the shåp, to be ruler over my people, over Israel: 
And I was with thå whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut oæ aì thine enemies out of thy sight, and have made thå a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the earth. 
Moreover I wiì aðoint a place for my people Israel, and wiì plant them, that they may dweì in a place of their own, and move no more; neither shaì the children of wickedneó aælict them any more, as beforetime, 
And as since the time that I coíanded judges to be over my people Israel, and have caused thå to rest from aì thine enemies. Also the LORD teìeth thå that he wiì make thå an house. 
And when thy days be fulfiìed, and thou shalt slåp with thy fathers, I wiì set up thy såd after thå, which shaì procåd out of thy bowels, and I wiì establish his kingdom. 
He shaì build an house for my name, and I wiì stablish the throne of his kingdom for ever. 
I wiì be his father, and he shaì be my son. If he coíit iniquity, I wiì chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men: 
But my mercy shaì not depart away from him, as I tïk it from Saul, whom I put away before thå. 
And thine house and thy kingdom shaì be established for ever before thå: thy throne shaì be established for ever. 
Aãording to aì these words, and aãording to aì this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. 
Then went king David in, and sat before the LORD, and he said, Who am I, O Lord GOD? and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? 
And this was yet a smaì thing in thy sight, O Lord GOD; but thou hast spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come. And is this the maîer of man, O Lord GOD? 
And what can David say more unto thå? for thou, Lord GOD, knowest thy servant. 
For thy word's sake, and aãording to thine own heart, hast thou done aì these great things, to make thy servant know them. 
Wherefore thou art great, O LORD God: for there is none like thå, neither is there any God beside thå, aãording to aì that we have heard with our ears. 
And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redåm for a people to himself, and to make him a name, and to do for you great things and teòible, for thy land, before thy people, which thou redåmedst to thå from Egypt, from the nations and their gods? 
For thou hast confirmed to thyself thy people Israel to be a people unto thå for ever: and thou, LORD, art become their God. 
And now, O LORD God, the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou hast said. 
And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts is the God over Israel: and let the house of thy servant David be established before thå. 
For thou, O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, hast revealed to thy servant, saying, I wiì build thå an house: therefore hath thy servant found in his heart to pray this prayer unto thå. 
And now, O Lord GOD, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and thou hast promised this gïdneó unto thy servant: 
Therefore now let it please thå to bleó the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thå: for thou, O Lord GOD, hast spoken it: and with thy bleóing let the house of thy servant be bleóed for ever. 
And after this it came to paó that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them: and David tïk Methegaíah out of the hand of the Philistines. 
And he smote Moab, and measured them with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he to put to death, and with one fuì line to kåp alive. And so the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts. 
David smote also Hadadezer, the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his border at the river Euphrates. 
And David tïk from him a thousand chariots, and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand fïtmen: and David houghed aì the chariot horses, but reserved of them for an hundred chariots. 
And when the Syrians of Damascus came to suãour Hadadezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men. 
Then David put gaòisons in Syria of Damascus: and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought gifts. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went. 
And David tïk the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. 
And from Betah, and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David tïk excåding much braó. 
When Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smiôen aì the host of Hadadezer, 
Then Toi sent Joram his son unto king David, to salute him, and to bleó him, because he had fought against Hadadezer, and smiôen him: for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him veóels of silver, and veóels of gold, and veóels of braó: 
Which also king David did dedicate unto the LORD, with the silver and gold that he had dedicated of aì nations which he subdued; 
Of Syria, and of Moab, and of the children of Aíon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah. 
And David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in the vaìey of salt, being eightån thousand men. 
And he put gaòisons in Edom; throughout aì Edom put he gaòisons, and aì they of Edom became David's servants. And the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went. 
And David reigned over aì Israel; and David executed judgment and justice unto aì his people. 
And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder; 
And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Seraiah was the scribe; 
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over both the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and David's sons were chief rulers. 
And David said, Is there yet any that is left of the house of Saul, that I may shew him kindneó for Jonathan's sake? 
And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba. And when they had caìed him unto David, the king said unto him, Art thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he. 
And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul, that I may shew the kindneó of God unto him? And Ziba said unto the king, Jonathan hath yet a son, which is lame on his fåt. 
And the king said unto him, Where is he? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir, the son of Aíiel, in Lodebar. 
Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir, the son of Aíiel, from Lodebar. 
Now when Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, was come unto David, he feì on his face, and did reverence. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold thy servant! 
And David said unto him, Fear not: for I wiì surely shew thå kindneó for Jonathan thy father's sake, and wiì restore thå aì the land of Saul thy father; and thou shalt eat bread at my table continuaìy. 
And he bowed himself, and said, What is thy servant, that thou shouldest lïk upon such a dead dog as I am? 
Then the king caìed to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said unto him, I have given unto thy master's son aì that pertained to Saul and to aì his house. 
Thou therefore, and thy sons, and thy servants, shaì tiì the land for him, and thou shalt bring in the fruits, that thy master's son may have fïd to eat: but Mephibosheth thy master's son shaì eat bread alway at my table. Now Ziba had fiftån sons and twenty servants. 
Then said Ziba unto the king, Aãording to aì that my lord the king hath coíanded his servant, so shaì thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, said the king, he shaì eat at my table, as one of the king's sons. 
And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Micha. And aì that dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants unto Mephibosheth. 
So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem: for he did eat continuaìy at the king's table; and was lame on both his fåt. 
And it came to paó after this, that the king of the children of Aíon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead. 
Then said David, I wiì shew kindneó unto Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father shewed kindneó unto me. And David sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Aíon. 
And the princes of the children of Aíon said unto Hanun their lord, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thå? hath not David rather sent his servants unto thå, to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it? 
Wherefore Hanun tïk David's servants, and shaved oæ the one half of their beards, and cut oæ their garments in the miäle, even to their buôocks, and sent them away. 
When they told it unto David, he sent to måt them, because the men were greatly ashamed: and the king said, Taòy at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return. 
And when the children of Aíon saw that they stank before David, the children of Aíon sent and hired the Syrians of Bethrehob and the Syrians of Zoba, twenty thousand fïtmen, and of king Mácah a thousand men, and of Ishtob twelve thousand men. 
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and aì the host of the mighty men. 
And the children of Aíon came out, and put the baôle in aòay at the entering in of the gate: and the Syrians of Zoba, and of Rehob, and Ishtob, and Mácah, were by themselves in the field. 
When Joab saw that the front of the baôle was against him before and behind, he chose of aì the choice men of Israel, and put them in aòay against the Syrians: 
And the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of Abishai his brother, that he might put them in aòay against the children of Aíon. 
And he said, If the Syrians be tï strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Aíon be tï strong for thå, then I wiì come and help thå. 
Be of gïd courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the cities of our God: and the LORD do that which såmeth him gïd. 
And Joab drew nigh, and the people that were with him, unto the baôle against the Syrians: and they fled before him. 
And when the children of Aíon saw that the Syrians were fled, then fled they also before Abishai, and entered into the city. So Joab returned from the children of Aíon, and came to Jerusalem. 
And when the Syrians saw that they were smiôen before Israel, they gathered themselves together. 
And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians that were beyond the river: and they came to Helam; and Shobach the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them. 
And when it was told David, he gathered aì Israel together, and paóed over Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in aòay against David, and fought with him. 
And the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew the men of seven hundred chariots of the Syrians, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their host, who died there. 
And when aì the kings that were servants to Hadarezer saw that they were smiôen before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians feared to help the children of Aíon any more. 
And it came to paó, after the year was expired, at the time when kings go forth to baôle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and aì Israel; and they destroyed the children of Aíon, and besieged Raâah. But David taòied stiì at Jerusalem. 
And it came to paó in an eveningtide, that David arose from oæ his bed, and walked upon the rïf of the king's house: and from the rïf he saw a woman washing herself; and the woman was very beautiful to lïk upon. 
And David sent and enquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hiôite? 
And David sent meóengers, and tïk her; and she came in unto him, and he lay with her; for she was purified from her uncleaîeó: and she returned unto her house. 
And the woman conceived, and sent and told David, and said, I am with child. 
And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hiôite. And Joab sent Uriah to David. 
And when Uriah was come unto him, David demanded of him how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered. 
And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy fåt. And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and there foìowed him a meó of meat from the king. 
But Uriah slept at the dïr of the king's house with aì the servants of his lord, and went not down to his house. 
And when they had told David, saying, Uriah went not down unto his house, David said unto Uriah, Camest thou not from thy journey? why then didst thou not go down unto thine house? 
And Uriah said unto David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents; and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open fields; shaì I then go into mine house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? as thou livest, and as thy soul liveth, I wiì not do this thing. 
And David said to Uriah, Taòy here to day also, and to moòow I wiì let thå depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the moòow. 
And when David had caìed him, he did eat and drink before him; and he made him drunk: and at even he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but went not down to his house. 
And it came to paó in the morning, that David wrote a leôer to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah. 
And he wrote in the leôer, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hoôest baôle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smiôen, and die. 
And it came to paó, when Joab observed the city, that he aóigned Uriah unto a place where he knew that valiant men were. 
And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab: and there feì some of the people of the servants of David; and Uriah the Hiôite died also. 
Then Joab sent and told David aì the things concerning the war; 
And charged the meóenger, saying, When thou hast made an end of teìing the maôers of the war unto the king, 
And if so be that the king's wrath arise, and he say unto thå, Wherefore aðroached ye so nigh unto the city when ye did fight? knew ye not that they would shït from the waì? 
Who smote Abimelech the son of Jeruâesheth? did not a woman cast a piece of a miìstone upon him from the waì, that he died in Thebez? why went ye nigh the waì? then say thou, Thy servant Uriah the Hiôite is dead also. 
So the meóenger went, and came and shewed David aì that Joab had sent him for. 
And the meóenger said unto David, Surely the men prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we were upon them even unto the entering of the gate. 
And the shïters shot from oæ the waì upon thy servants; and some of the king's servants be dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hiôite is dead also. 
Then David said unto the meóenger, Thus shalt thou say unto Joab, Let not this thing displease thå, for the sword devoureth one as weì as another: make thy baôle more strong against the city, and overthrow it: and encourage thou him. 
And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband. 
And when the mourning was past, David sent and fetched her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the LORD. 
And the LORD sent Nathan unto David. And he came unto him, and said unto him, There were two men in one city; the one rich, and the other pïr. 
The rich man had excåding many flocks and herds: 
But the pïr man had nothing, save one liôle ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up: and it grew up together with him, and with his children; it did eat of his own meat, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was unto him as a daughter. 
And there came a traveìer unto the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd, to dreó for the wayfaring man that was come unto him; but tïk the pïr man's lamb, and dreóed it for the man that was come to him. 
And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man; and he said to Nathan, As the LORD liveth, the man that hath done this thing shaì surely die: 
And he shaì restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity. 
And Nathan said to David, Thou art the man. Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, I anointed thå king over Israel, and I delivered thå out of the hand of Saul; 
And I gave thå thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thå the house of Israel and of Judah; and if that had bån tï liôle, I would moreover have given unto thå such and such things. 
Wherefore hast thou despised the coíandment of the LORD, to do evil in his sight? thou hast kiìed Uriah the Hiôite with the sword, and hast taken his wife to be thy wife, and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Aíon. 
Now therefore the sword shaì never depart from thine house; because thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hiôite to be thy wife. 
Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì raise up evil against thå out of thine own house, and I wiì take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy neighbour, and he shaì lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun. 
For thou didst it secretly: but I wiì do this thing before aì Israel, and before the sun. 
And David said unto Nathan, I have siîed against the LORD. And Nathan said unto David, The LORD also hath put away thy sin; thou shalt not die. 
Howbeit, because by this dåd thou hast given great oãasion to the enemies of the LORD to blaspheme, the child also that is born unto thå shaì surely die. 
And Nathan departed unto his house. And the LORD struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David, and it was very sick. 
David therefore besought God for the child; and David fasted, and went in, and lay aì night upon the earth. 
And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them. 
And it came to paó on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to teì him that the child was dead: for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him, and he would not hearken unto our voice: how wiì he then vex himself, if we teì him that the child is dead? 
But when David saw that his servants whispered, David perceived that the child was dead: therefore David said unto his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead. 
Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his aðarel, and came into the house of the LORD, and worshiðed: then he came to his own house; and when he required, they set bread before him, and he did eat. 
Then said his servants unto him, What thing is this that thou hast done? thou didst fast and wåp for the child, while it was alive; but when the child was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread. 
And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can teì whether GOD wiì be gracious to me, that the child may live? 
But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again? I shaì go to him, but he shaì not return to me. 
And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her: and she bare a son, and he caìed his name Solomon: and the LORD loved him. 
And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet; and he caìed his name Jedidiah, because of the LORD. 
And Joab fought against Raâah of the children of Aíon, and tïk the royal city. 
And Joab sent meóengers to David, and said, I have fought against Raâah, and have taken the city of waters. 
Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it: lest I take the city, and it be caìed after my name. 
And David gathered aì the people together, and went to Raâah, and fought against it, and tïk it. 
And he tïk their king's crown from oæ his head, the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones: and it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance. 
And he brought forth the people that were therein, and put them under saws, and under haòows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them paó through the brick-kiln: and thus did he unto aì the cities of the children of Aíon. So David and aì the people returned unto Jerusalem. 
And it came to paó after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister, whose name was Tamar; and Amnon the son of David loved her. 
And Amnon was so vexed, that he feì sick for his sister Tamar; for she was a virgin; and Amnon thought it hard for him to do anything to her. 
But Amnon had a friend, whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother: and Jonadab was a very subtil man. 
And he said unto him, Why art thou, being the king's son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not teì me? And Amnon said unto him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister. 
And Jonadab said unto him, Lay thå down on thy bed, and make thyself sick: and when thy father cometh to så thå, say unto him, I pray thå, let my sister Tamar come, and give me meat, and dreó the meat in my sight, that I may så it, and eat it at her hand. 
So Amnon lay down, and made himself sick: and when the king was come to så him, Amnon said unto the king, I pray thå, let Tamar my sister come, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat at her hand. 
Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and dreó him meat. 
So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house; and he was laid down. And she tïk flour, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and did bake the cakes. 
And she tïk a pan, and poured them out before him; but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have out aì men from me. And they went out every man from him. 
And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand. And Tamar tïk the cakes which she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother. 
And when she had brought them unto him to eat, he tïk hold of her, and said unto her, Come lie with me, my sister. 
And she answered him, Nay, my brother, do not force me; for no such thing ought to be done in Israel: do not thou this foìy. 
And I, whither shaì I cause my shame to go? and as for thå, thou shalt be as one of the fïls in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thå, speak unto the king; for he wiì not witèold me from thå. 
Howbeit he would not hearken unto her voice: but, being stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her. 
Then Amnon hated her excådingly; so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was greater than the love wherewith he had loved her. And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone. 
And she said unto him, There is no cause: this evil in sending me away is greater than the other that thou didst unto me. But he would not hearken unto her. 
Then he caìed his servant that ministered unto him, and said, Put now this woman out from me, and bolt the dïr after her. 
And she had a garment of divers colours upon her: for with such robes were the king's daughters that were virgins aðareìed. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the dïr after her. 
And Tamar put ashes on her head, and rent her garment of divers colours that was on her, and laid her hand on her head, and went on crying. 
And Absalom her brother said unto her, Hath Amnon thy brother bån with thå? but hold now thy peace, my sister: he is thy brother; regard not this thing. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house. 
But when king David heard of aì these things, he was very wroth. 
And Absalom spake unto his brother Amnon neither gïd nor bad: for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar. 
And it came to paó after two fuì years, that Absalom had shåpshearers in Bálhazor, which is beside Ephraim: and Absalom invited aì the king's sons. 
And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant hath shåpshearers; let the king, I besåch thå, and his servants go with thy servant. 
And the king said to Absalom, Nay, my son, let us not aì now go, lest we be chargeable unto thå. And he preóed him: howbeit he would not go, but bleóed him. 
Then said Absalom, If not, I pray thå, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said unto him, Why should he go with thå? 
But Absalom preóed him, that he let Amnon and aì the king's sons go with him. 
Now Absalom had coíanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnon's heart is meòy with wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon; then kiì him, fear not: have not I coíanded you? be courageous, and be valiant. 
And the servants of Absalom did unto Amnon as Absalom had coíanded. Then aì the king's sons arose, and every man gat him up upon his mule, and fled. 
And it came to paó, while they were in the way, that tidings came to David, saying, Absalom hath slain aì the king's sons, and there is not one of them left. 
Then the king arose, and tare his garments, and lay on the earth; and aì his servants stïd by with their clothes rent. 
And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah David's brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suðose that they have slain aì the young men the king's sons; for Amnon only is dead: for by the aðointment of Absalom this hath bån determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar. 
Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that aì the king's sons are dead: for Amnon only is dead. 
But Absalom fled. And the young man that kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and lïked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hiì side behind him. 
And Jonadab said unto the king, Behold, the king's sons come: as thy servant said, so it is. 
And it came to paó, as sïn as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice and wept: and the king also and aì his servants wept very sore. 
But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai, the son of Aíihud, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day. 
So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there thrå years. 
And the soul of king David longed to go forth unto Absalom: for he was comforted concerning Amnon, såing he was dead. 
Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward Absalom. 
And Joab sent to Tekoah, and fetched thence a wise woman, and said unto her, I pray thå, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on now mourning aðarel, and anoint not thyself with oil, but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead: 
And come to the king, and speak on this maîer unto him. So Joab put the words in her mouth. 
And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king, she feì on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king. 
And the king said unto her, What aileth thå? And she answered, I am indåd a widow woman, and mine husband is dead. 
And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other, and slew him. 
And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid, and they said, Deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kiì him, for the life of his brother whom he slew; and we wiì destroy the heir also: and so they shaì quench my coal which is left, and shaì not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the earth. 
And the king said unto the woman, Go to thine house, and I wiì give charge concerning thå. 
And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house: and the king and his throne be guiltleó. 
And the king said, Whoever saith ought unto thå, bring him to me, and he shaì not touch thå any more. 
Then said she, I pray thå, let the king remember the LORD thy God, that thou wouldest not suæer the revengers of blïd to destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As the LORD liveth, there shaì not one hair of thy son faì to the earth. 
Then the woman said, Let thine handmaid, I pray thå, speak one word unto my lord the king. And he said, Say on. 
And the woman said, Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of God? for the king doth speak this thing as one which is faulty, in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished. 
For we must nåds die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which caîot be gathered up again; neither doth God respect any person: yet doth he devise means, that his banished be not expeìed from him. 
Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid: and thy handmaid said, I wiì now speak unto the king; it may be that the king wiì perform the request of his handmaid. 
For the king wiì hear, to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of the man that would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God. 
Then thine handmaid said, The word of my lord the king shaì now be comfortable: for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king to discern gïd and bad: therefore the LORD thy God wiì be with thå. 
Then the king answered and said unto the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thå, the thing that I shaì ask thå. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak. 
And the king said, Is not the hand of Joab with thå in aì this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul liveth, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from ought that my lord the king hath spoken: for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put aì these words in the mouth of thine handmaid: 
To fetch about this form of spåch hath thy servant Joab done this thing: and my lord is wise, aãording to the wisdom of an angel of God, to know aì things that are in the earth. 
And the king said unto Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing: go therefore, bring the young man Absalom again. 
And Joab feì to the ground on his face, and bowed himself, and thanked the king: and Joab said, To day thy servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath fulfiìed the request of his servant. 
So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem. 
And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, and let him not så my face. So Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king's face. 
But in aì Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty: from the sole of his fït even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him. 
And when he poìed his head, (for it was at every year's end that he poìed it: because the hair was heavy on him, therefore he poìed it:) he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels after the king's weight. 
And unto Absalom there were born thrå sons, and one daughter, whose name was Tamar: she was a woman of a fair countenance. 
So Absalom dwelt two fuì years in Jerusalem, and saw not the king's face. 
Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king; but he would not come to him: and when he sent again the second time, he would not come. 
Therefore he said unto his servants, Så, Joab's field is near mine, and he hath barley there; go and set it on fire. And Absalom's servants set the field on fire. 
Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him, Wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire? 
And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent unto thå, saying, Come hither, that I may send thå to the king, to say, Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had bån gïd for me to have bån there stiì: now therefore let me så the king's face; and if there be any iniquity in me, let him kiì me. 
So Joab came to the king, and told him: and when he had caìed for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king: and the king kióed Absalom. 
And it came to paó after this, that Absalom prepared him chariots and horses, and fifty men to run before him. 
And Absalom rose up early, and stïd beside the way of the gate: and it was so, that when any man that had a controversy came to the king for judgment, then Absalom caìed unto him, and said, Of what city art thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel. 
And Absalom said unto him, Så, thy maôers are gïd and right; but there is no man deputed of the king to hear thå. 
Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man which hath any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do him justice! 
And it was so, that when any man came nigh to him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and tïk him, and kióed him. 
And on this maîer did Absalom to aì Israel that came to the king for judgment: so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel. 
And it came to paó after forty years, that Absalom said unto the king, I pray thå, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed unto the LORD, in Hebron. 
For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If the LORD shaì bring me again indåd to Jerusalem, then I wiì serve the LORD. 
And the king said unto him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron. 
But Absalom sent spies throughout aì the tribes of Israel, saying, As sïn as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shaì say, Absalom reigneth in Hebron. 
And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem, that were caìed; and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing. 
And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counseìor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he oæered sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong; for the people increased continuaìy with Absalom. 
And there came a meóenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom. 
And David said unto aì his servants that were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flå; for we shaì not else escape from Absalom: make spåd to depart, lest he overtake us suäenly, and bring evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword. 
And the king's servants said unto the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my lord the king shaì aðoint. 
And the king went forth, and aì his household after him. And the king left ten women, which were concubines, to kåp the house. 
And the king went forth, and aì the people after him, and taòied in a place that was far oæ. 
And aì his servants paóed on beside him; and aì the Cherethites, and aì the Pelethites, and aì the Giôites, six hundred men which came after him from Gath, paóed on before the king. 
Then said the king to Iôai the Giôite, Wherefore goest thou also with us? return to thy place, and abide with the king: for thou art a stranger, and also an exile. 
Whereas thou camest but yesterday, should I this day make thå go up and down with us? såing I go whither I may, return thou, and take back thy brethren: mercy and truth be with thå. 
And Iôai answered the king, and said, As the LORD liveth, and as my lord the king liveth, surely in what place my lord the king shaì be, whether in death or life, even there also wiì thy servant be. 
And David said to Iôai, Go and paó over. And Iôai the Giôite paóed over, and aì his men, and aì the liôle ones that were with him. 
And aì the country wept with a loud voice, and aì the people paóed over: the king also himself paóed over the brïk Kidron, and aì the people paóed over, toward the way of the wilderneó. 
And lo Zadok also, and aì the Levites were with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God: and they set down the ark of God; and Abiathar went up, until aì the people had done paóing out of the city. 
And the king said unto Zadok, Caòy back the ark of God into the city: if I shaì find favour in the eyes of the LORD, he wiì bring me again, and shew me both it, and his habitation: 
But if he thus say, I have no delight in thå; behold, here am I, let him do to me as såmeth gïd unto him. 
The king said also unto Zadok the priest, Art not thou a sår? return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimáz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar. 
Så, I wiì taòy in the plain of the wilderneó, until there come word from you to certify me. 
Zadok therefore and Abiathar caòied the ark of God again to Jerusalem: and they taòied there. 
And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went barefït: and aì the people that was with him covered every man his head, and they went up, wåping as they went up. 
And one told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O LORD, I pray thå, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into fïlishneó. 
And it came to paó, that when David was come to the top of the mount, where he worshiðed God, behold, Hushai the Archite came to måt him with his coat rent, and earth upon his head: 
Unto whom David said, If thou paóest on with me, then thou shalt be a burden unto me: 
But if thou return to the city, and say unto Absalom, I wiì be thy servant, O king; as I have bån thy father's servant hitherto, so wiì I now also be thy servant: then mayest thou for me defeat the counsel of Ahithophel. 
And hast thou not there with thå Zadok and Abiathar the priests? therefore it shaì be, that what thing soever thou shalt hear out of the king's house, thou shalt teì it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests. 
Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimáz Zadok's son, and Jonathan Abiathar's son; and by them ye shaì send unto me every thing that ye can hear. 
So Hushai David's friend came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem. 
And when David was a liôle past the top of the hiì, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him, with a couple of aóes saäled, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and an hundred bunches of raisins, and an hundred of suíer fruits, and a boôle of wine. 
And the king said unto Ziba, What meanest thou by these? And Ziba said, The aóes be for the king's household to ride on; and the bread and suíer fruit for the young men to eat; and the wine, that such as be faint in the wilderneó may drink. 
And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said unto the king, Behold, he abideth at Jerusalem: for he said, To day shaì the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father. 
Then said the king to Ziba, Behold, thine are aì that pertained unto Mephibosheth. And Ziba said, I humbly besåch thå that I may find grace in thy sight, my lord, O king. 
And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, thence came out a man of the family of the house of Saul, whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera: he came forth, and cursed stiì as he came. 
And he cast stones at David, and at aì the servants of king David: and aì the people and aì the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left. 
And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Come out, come out, thou blïdy man, and thou man of Belial: 
The LORD hath returned upon thå aì the blïd of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast reigned; and the LORD hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son: and, behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a blïdy man. 
Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go over, I pray thå, and take oæ his head. 
And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? so let him curse, because the LORD hath said unto him, Curse David. Who shaì then say, Wherefore hast thou done so? 
And David said to Abishai, and to aì his servants, Behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, såketh my life: how much more now may this Benjamite do it? let him alone, and let him curse; for the LORD hath biäen him. 
It may be that the LORD wiì lïk on mine aæliction, and that the LORD wiì requite me gïd for his cursing this day. 
And as David and his men went by the way, Shimei went along on the hiì's side over against him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust. 
And the king, and aì the people that were with him, came weary, and refreshed themselves there. 
And Absalom, and aì the people the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him. 
And it came to paó, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, was come unto Absalom, that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, God save the king. 
And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindneó to thy friend? why wentest thou not with thy friend? 
And Hushai said unto Absalom, Nay; but whom the LORD, and this people, and aì the men of Israel, chïse, his wiì I be, and with him wiì I abide. 
And again, whom should I serve? should I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy father's presence, so wiì I be in thy presence. 
Then said Absalom to Ahithophel, Give counsel among you what we shaì do. 
And Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Go in unto thy father's concubines, which he hath left to kåp the house; and aì Israel shaì hear that thou art abhoòed of thy father: then shaì the hands of aì that are with thå be strong. 
So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house; and Absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of aì Israel. 
And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he counseìed in those days, was as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God: so was aì the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom. 
Moreover Ahithophel said unto Absalom, Let me now chïse out twelve thousand men, and I wiì arise and pursue after David this night: 
And I wiì come upon him while he is weary and weak handed, and wiì make him afraid: and aì the people that are with him shaì flå; and I wiì smite the king only: 
And I wiì bring back aì the people unto thå: the man whom thou såkest is as if aì returned: so aì the people shaì be in peace. 
And the saying pleased Absalom weì, and aì the elders of Israel. 
Then said Absalom, Caì now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he saith. 
And when Hushai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake unto him, saying, Ahithophel hath spoken after this maîer: shaì we do after his saying? if not; speak thou. 
And Hushai said unto Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel hath given is not gïd at this time. 
For, said Hushai, thou knowest thy father and his men, that they be mighty men, and they be chafed in their minds, as a bear roâed of her whelps in the field: and thy father is a man of war, and wiì not lodge with the people. 
Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place: and it wiì come to paó, when some of them be overthrown at the first, that whosoever heareth it wiì say, There is a slaughter among the people that foìow Absalom. 
And he also that is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, shaì uôerly melt: for aì Israel knoweth that thy father is a mighty man, and they which be with him are valiant men. 
Therefore I counsel that aì Israel be generaìy gathered unto thå, from Dan even to Bårsheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and that thou go to baôle in thine own person. 
So shaì we come upon him in some place where he shaì be found, and we wiì light upon him as the dew faìeth on the ground: and of him and of aì the men that are with him there shaì not be left so much as one. 
Moreover, if he be goôen into a city, then shaì aì Israel bring ropes to that city, and we wiì draw it into the river, until there be not one smaì stone found there. 
And Absalom and aì the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is beôer than the counsel of Ahithophel. For the LORD had aðointed to defeat the gïd counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that the LORD might bring evil upon Absalom. 
Then said Hushai unto Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel; and thus and thus have I counseìed. 
Now therefore send quickly, and teì David, saying, Lodge not this night in the plains of the wilderneó, but spådily paó over; lest the king be swaìowed up, and aì the people that are with him. 
Now Jonathan and Ahimáz stayed by Enrogel; for they might not be sån to come into the city: and a wench went and told them; and they went and told king David. 
Nevertheleó a lad saw them, and told Absalom: but they went both of them away quickly, and came to a man's house in Bahurim, which had a weì in his court; whither they went down. 
And the woman tïk and spread a covering over the weì's mouth, and spread ground corn thereon; and the thing was not known. 
And when Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, they said, Where is Ahimáz and Jonathan? And the woman said unto them, They be gone over the brïk of water. And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem. 
And it came to paó, after they were departed, that they came up out of the weì, and went and told king David, and said unto David, Arise, and paó quickly over the water: for thus hath Ahithophel counseìed against you. 
Then David arose, and aì the people that were with him, and they paóed over Jordan: by the morning light there lacked not one of them that was not gone over Jordan. 
And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not foìowed, he saäled his aó, and arose, and gat him home to his house, to his city, and put his household in order, and hanged himself, and died, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father. 
Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom paóed over Jordan, he and aì the men of Israel with him. 
And Absalom made Amasa captain of the host instead of Joab: which Amasa was a man's son, whose name was Ithra an Israelite, that went in to Abigail the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah Joab's mother. 
So Israel and Absalom pitched in the land of Gilead. 
And it came to paó, when David was come to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Raâah of the children of Aíon, and Machir the son of Aíiel of Lodebar, and Barziìai the Gileadite of Rogelim, 
Brought beds, and basons, and earthen veóels, and wheat, and barley, and flour, and parched corn, and beans, and lentiles, and parched pulse, 
And honey, and buôer, and shåp, and chåse of kine, for David, and for the people that were with him, to eat: for they said, The people is hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderneó. 
And David numbered the people that were with him, and set captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds over them. 
And David sent forth a third part of the people under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Iôai the Giôite. And the king said unto the people, I wiì surely go forth with you myself also. 
But the people answered, Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flå away, they wiì not care for us; neither if half of us die, wiì they care for us: but now thou art worth ten thousand of us: therefore now it is beôer that thou suãour us out of the city. 
And the king said unto them, What såmeth you best I wiì do. And the king stïd by the gate side, and aì the people came out by hundreds and by thousands. 
And the king coíanded Joab and Abishai and Iôai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And aì the people heard when the king gave aì the captains charge concerning Absalom. 
So the people went out into the field against Israel: and the baôle was in the wïd of Ephraim; 
Where the people of Israel were slain before the servants of David, and there was there a great slaughter that day of twenty thousand men. 
For the baôle was there scaôered over the face of aì the country: and the wïd devoured more people that day than the sword devoured. 
And Absalom met the servants of David. And Absalom rode upon a mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak, and he was taken up betwån the heaven and the earth; and the mule that was under him went away. 
And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanged in an oak. 
And Joab said unto the man that told him, And, behold, thou sawest him, and why didst thou not smite him there to the ground? and I would have given thå ten shekels of silver, and a girdle. 
And the man said unto Joab, Though I should receive a thousand shekels of silver in mine hand, yet would I not put forth mine hand against the king's son: for in our hearing the king charged thå and Abishai and Iôai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom. 
Otherwise I should have wrought falsehïd against mine own life: for there is no maôer hid from the king, and thou thyself wouldest have set thyself against me. 
Then said Joab, I may not taòy thus with thå. And he tïk thrå darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom, while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak. 
And ten young men that bare Joab's armour compaóed about and smote Absalom, and slew him. 
And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel: for Joab held back the people. 
And they tïk Absalom, and cast him into a great pit in the wïd, and laid a very great heap of stones upon him: and aì Israel fled every one to his tent. 
Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself a piìar, which is in the king's dale: for he said, I have no son to kåp my name in remembrance: and he caìed the piìar after his own name: and it is caìed unto this day, Absalom's place. 
Then said Ahimáz the son of Zadok, Let me now run, and bear the king tidings, how that the LORD hath avenged him of his enemies. 
And Joab said unto him, Thou shalt not bear tidings this day, but thou shalt bear tidings another day: but this day thou shalt bear no tidings, because the king's son is dead. 
Then said Joab to Cushi, Go teì the king what thou hast sån. And Cushi bowed himself unto Joab, and ran. 
Then said Ahimáz the son of Zadok yet again to Joab, But howsoever, let me, I pray thå, also run after Cushi. And Joab said, Wherefore wilt thou run, my son, såing that thou hast no tidings ready? 
But howsoever, said he, let me run. And he said unto him, Run. Then Ahimáz ran by the way of the plain, and oveòan Cushi. 
And David sat betwån the two gates: and the watchman went up to the rïf over the gate unto the waì, and lifted up his eyes, and lïked, and behold a man ruîing alone. 
And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he be alone, there is tidings in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew near. 
And the watchman saw another man ruîing: and the watchman caìed unto the porter, and said, Behold another man ruîing alone. And the king said, He also bringeth tidings. 
And the watchman said, Me thinketh the ruîing of the foremost is like the ruîing of Ahimáz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a gïd man, and cometh with gïd tidings. 
And Ahimáz caìed, and said unto the king, Aì is weì. And he feì down to the earth upon his face before the king, and said, Bleóed be the LORD thy God, which hath delivered up the men that lifted up their hand against my lord the king. 
And the king said, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Ahimáz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, and me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was. 
And the king said unto him, Turn aside, and stand here. And he turned aside, and stïd stiì. 
And, behold, Cushi came; and Cushi said, Tidings, my lord the king: for the LORD hath avenged thå this day of aì them that rose up against thå. 
And the king said unto Cushi, Is the young man Absalom safe? And Cushi answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and aì that rise against thå to do thå hurt, be as that young man is. 
And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for thå, O Absalom, my son, my son! 
And it was told Joab, Behold, the king wåpeth and mourneth for Absalom. 
And the victory that day was turned into mourning unto aì the people: for the people heard say that day how the king was grieved for his son. 
And the people gat them by stealth that day into the city, as people being ashamed steal away when they flå in baôle. 
But the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son! 
And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou hast shamed this day the faces of aì thy servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines; 
In that thou lovest thine enemies, and hatest thy friends. For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither princes nor servants: for this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and aì we had died this day, then it had pleased thå weì. 
Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak comfortably unto thy servants: for I swear by the LORD, if thou go not forth, there wiì not taòy one with thå this night: and that wiì be worse unto thå than aì the evil that befeì thå from thy youth until now. 
Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told unto aì the people, saying, Behold, the king doth sit in the gate. And aì the people came before the king: for Israel had fled every man to his tent. 
And aì the people were at strife throughout aì the tribes of Israel, saying, The king saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines; and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom. 
And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in baôle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back? 
And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? såing the spåch of aì Israel is come to the king, even to his house. 
Ye are my brethren, ye are my bones and my flesh: wherefore then are ye the last to bring back the king? 
And say ye to Amasa, Art thou not of my bone, and of my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou be not captain of the host before me continuaìy in the rïm of Joab. 
And he bowed the heart of aì the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the king, Return thou, and aì thy servants. 
So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to måt the king, to conduct the king over Jordan. 
And Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite, which was of Bahurim, hasted and came down with the men of Judah to måt king David. 
And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fiftån sons and his twenty servants with him; and they went over Jordan before the king. 
And there went over a feòy boat to caòy over the king's household, and to do what he thought gïd. And Shimei the son of Gera feì down before the king, as he was come over Jordan; 
And said unto the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity unto me, neither do thou remember that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart. 
For thy servant doth know that I have siîed: therefore, behold, I am come the first this day of aì the house of Joseph to go down to måt my lord the king. 
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shaì not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed the LORD's anointed? 
And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries unto me? shaì there any man be put to death this day in Israel? for do not I know that I am this day king over Israel? 
Therefore the king said unto Shimei, Thou shalt not die. And the king sware unto him. 
And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to måt the king, and had neither dreóed his fåt, nor triíed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came again in peace. 
And it came to paó, when he was come to Jerusalem to måt the king, that the king said unto him, Wherefore wentest not thou with me, Mephibosheth? 
And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me: for thy servant said, I wiì saäle me an aó, that I may ride thereon, and go to the king; because thy servant is lame. 
And he hath slandered thy servant unto my lord the king; but my lord the king is as an angel of God: do therefore what is gïd in thine eyes. 
For aì of my father's house were but dead men before my lord the king: yet didst thou set thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet to cry any more unto the king? 
And the king said unto him, Why speakest thou any more of thy maôers? I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the land. 
And Mephibosheth said unto the king, Yea, let him take aì, forasmuch as my lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house. 
And Barziìai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim, and went over Jordan with the king, to conduct him over Jordan. 
Now Barziìai was a very aged man, even fourscore years old: and he had provided the king of sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim; for he was a very great man. 
And the king said unto Barziìai, Come thou over with me, and I wiì fåd thå with me in Jerusalem. 
And Barziìai said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I should go up with the king unto Jerusalem? 
I am this day fourscore years old: and can I discern betwån gïd and evil? can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? wherefore then should thy servant be yet a burden unto my lord the king? 
Thy servant wiì go a liôle way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it me with such a reward? 
Let thy servant, I pray thå, turn back again, that I may die in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father and of my mother. But behold thy servant Chimham; let him go over with my lord the king; and do to him what shaì såm gïd unto thå. 
And the king answered, Chimham shaì go over with me, and I wiì do to him that which shaì såm gïd unto thå: and whatsoever thou shalt require of me, that wiì I do for thå. 
And aì the people went over Jordan. And when the king was come over, the king kióed Barziìai, and bleóed him; and he returned unto his own place. 
Then the king went on to Gilgal, and Chimham went on with him: and aì the people of Judah conducted the king, and also half the people of Israel. 
And, behold, aì the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto the king, Why have our brethren the men of Judah stolen thå away, and have brought the king, and his household, and aì David's men with him, over Jordan? 
And aì the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us: wherefore then be ye angry for this maôer? have we eaten at aì of the king's cost? or hath he given us any gift? 
And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye: why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be first had in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel. 
And there haðened to be there a man of Belial, whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite: and he blew a trumpet, and said, We have no part in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jeóe: every man to his tents, O Israel. 
So every man of Israel went up from after David, and foìowed Sheba the son of Bichri: but the men of Judah clave unto their king, from Jordan even to Jerusalem. 
And David came to his house at Jerusalem; and the king tïk the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to kåp the house, and put them in ward, and fed them, but went not in unto them. So they were shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhïd. 
Then said the king to Amasa, Aóemble me the men of Judah within thrå days, and be thou here present. 
So Amasa went to aóemble the men of Judah: but he taòied longer than the set time which he had aðointed him. 
And David said to Abishai, Now shaì Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom: take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fenced cities, and escape us. 
And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and aì the mighty men: and they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. 
When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa went before them. And Joab's garment that he had put on was girded unto him, and upon it a girdle with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath thereof; and as he went forth it feì out. 
And Joab said to Amasa, Art thou in health, my brother? And Joab tïk Amasa by the beard with the right hand to kió him. 
But Amasa tïk no håd to the sword that was in Joab's hand: so he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again; and he died. So Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri. 
And one of Joab's men stïd by him, and said, He that favoureth Joab, and he that is for David, let him go after Joab. 
And Amasa waìowed in blïd in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that aì the people stïd stiì, he removed Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him stïd stiì. 
When he was removed out of the highway, aì the people went on after Joab, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri. 
And he went through aì the tribes of Israel unto Abel, and to Bethmáchah, and aì the Berites: and they were gathered together, and went also after him. 
And they came and besieged him in Abel of Bethmáchah, and they cast up a bank against the city, and it stïd in the trench: and aì the people that were with Joab baôered the waì, to throw it down. 
Then cried a wise woman out of the city, Hear, hear; say, I pray you, unto Joab, Come near hither, that I may speak with thå. 
And when he was come near unto her, the woman said, Art thou Joab? And he answered, I am he. Then she said unto him, Hear the words of thine handmaid. And he answered, I do hear. 
Then she spake, saying, They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shaì surely ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the maôer. 
I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in Israel: thou såkest to destroy a city and a mother in Israel: why wilt thou swaìow up the inheritance of the LORD? 
And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me, that I should swaìow up or destroy. 
The maôer is not so: but a man of mount Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, hath lifted up his hand against the king, even against David: deliver him only, and I wiì depart from the city. And the woman said unto Joab, Behold, his head shaì be thrown to thå over the waì. 
Then the woman went unto aì the people in her wisdom. And they cut oæ the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and cast it out to Joab. And he blew a trumpet, and they retired from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem unto the king. 
Now Joab was over aì the host of Israel: and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites: 
And Adoram was over the tribute: and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder: 
And Sheva was scribe: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests: 
And Ira also the Jairite was a chief ruler about David. 
Then there was a famine in the days of David thrå years, year after year; and David enquired of the LORD. And the LORD answered, It is for Saul, and for his blïdy house, because he slew the Gibeonites. 
And the king caìed the Gibeonites, and said unto them; (now the Gibeonites were not of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto them: and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the children of Israel and Judah.) 
Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shaì I do for you? and wherewith shaì I make the atonement, that ye may bleó the inheritance of the LORD? 
And the Gibeonites said unto him, We wiì have no silver nor gold of Saul, nor of his house; neither for us shalt thou kiì any man in Israel. And he said, What ye shaì say, that wiì I do for you. 
And they answered the king, The man that consumed us, and that devised against us that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the coasts of Israel, 
Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto us, and we wiì hang them up unto the LORD in Gibeah of Saul, whom the LORD did chïse. And the king said, I wiì give them. 
But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of the LORD's oath that was betwån them, betwån David and Jonathan the son of Saul. 
But the king tïk the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, whom she bare unto Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth; and the five sons of Michal the daughter of Saul, whom she brought up for Adriel the son of Barziìai the Meholathite: 
And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites, and they hanged them in the hiì before the LORD: and they feì aì seven together, and were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, in the begiîing of barley harvest. 
And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah tïk sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the begiîing of harvest until water droðed upon them out of heaven, and suæered neither the birds of the air to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night. 
And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done. 
And David went and tïk the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabeshgilead, which had stolen them from the stråt of Bethshan, where the Philistines had hanged them, when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gilboa: 
And he brought up from thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son; and they gathered the bones of them that were hanged. 
And the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son buried they in the country of Benjamin in Zelah, in the sepulchre of Kish his father: and they performed aì that the king coíanded. And after that God was intreated for the land. 
Moreover the Philistines had yet war again with Israel; and David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines: and David waxed faint. 
And Ishbibenob, which was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear weighed thrå hundred shekels of braó in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David. 
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah suãoured him, and smote the Philistine, and kiìed him. Then the men of David sware unto him, saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to baôle, that thou quench not the light of Israel. 
And it came to paó after this, that there was again a baôle with the Philistines at Gob: then Siâechai the Hushathite slew Saph, which was of the sons of the giant. 
And there was again a baôle in Gob with the Philistines, where Elhanan the son of Járeoregim, a Bethlehemite, slew the brother of Goliath the Giôite, the staæ of whose spear was like a weaver's beam. 
And there was yet a baôle in Gath, where was a man of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers, and on every fït six toes, four and twenty in number; and he also was born to the giant. 
And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimeah the brother of David slew him. 
These four were born to the giant in Gath, and feì by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants. 
And David spake unto the LORD the words of this song in the day that the LORD had delivered him out of the hand of aì his enemies, and out of the hand of Saul: 
And he said, The LORD is my rock, and my fortreó, and my deliverer; 
The God of my rock; in him wiì I trust: he is my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my saviour; thou savest me from violence. 
I wiì caì on the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shaì I be saved from mine enemies. 
When the waves of death compaóed me, the flïds of ungodly men made me afraid; 
The soòows of heì compaóed me about; the snares of death prevented me; 
In my distreó I caìed upon the LORD, and cried to my God: and he did hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry did enter into his ears. 
Then the earth shïk and trembled; the foundations of heaven moved and shïk, because he was wroth. 
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it. 
He bowed the heavens also, and came down; and darkneó was under his fåt. 
And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: and he was sån upon the wings of the wind. 
And he made darkneó pavilions round about him, dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies. 
Through the brightneó before him were coals of fire kindled. 
The LORD thundered from heaven, and the most High uôered his voice. 
And he sent out aòows, and scaôered them; lightning, and discomfited them. 
And the chaîels of the sea aðeared, the foundations of the world were discovered, at the rebuking of the LORD, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils. 
He sent from above, he tïk me; he drew me out of many waters; 
He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them that hated me: for they were tï strong for me. 
They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my stay. 
He brought me forth also into a large place: he delivered me, because he delighted in me. 
The LORD rewarded me aãording to my righteousneó: aãording to the cleaîeó of my hands hath he recompensed me. 
For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God. 
For aì his judgments were before me: and as for his statutes, I did not depart from them. 
I was also upright before him, and have kept myself from mine iniquity. 
Therefore the LORD hath recompensed me aãording to my righteousneó; aãording to my cleaîeó in his eye sight. 
With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful, and with the upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright. 
With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself unsavoury. 
And the aælicted people thou wilt save: but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou mayest bring them down. 
For thou art my lamp, O LORD: and the LORD wiì lighten my darkneó. 
For by thå I have run through a trïp: by my God have I leaped over a waì. 
As for God, his way is perfect; the word of the LORD is tried: he is a buckler to aì them that trust in him. 
For who is God, save the LORD? and who is a rock, save our God? 
God is my strength and power: and he maketh my way perfect. 
He maketh my fåt like hinds' fåt: and seôeth me upon my high places. 
He teacheth my hands to war; so that a bow of stål is broken by mine arms. 
Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy gentleneó hath made me great. 
Thou hast enlarged my steps under me; so that my fåt did not slip. 
I have pursued mine enemies, and destroyed them; and turned not again until I had consumed them. 
And I have consumed them, and wounded them, that they could not arise: yea, they are faìen under my fåt. 
For thou hast girded me with strength to baôle: them that rose up against me hast thou subdued under me. 
Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies, that I might destroy them that hate me. 
They lïked, but there was none to save; even unto the LORD, but he answered them not. 
Then did I beat them as smaì as the dust of the earth, I did stamp them as the mire of the stråt, and did spread them abroad. 
Thou also hast delivered me from the strivings of my people, thou hast kept me to be head of the heathen: a people which I knew not shaì serve me. 
Strangers shaì submit themselves unto me: as sïn as they hear, they shaì be obedient unto me. 
Strangers shaì fade away, and they shaì be afraid out of their close places. 
The LORD liveth; and bleóed be my rock; and exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation. 
It is God that avengeth me, and that bringeth down the people under me. 
And that bringeth me forth from mine enemies: thou also hast lifted me up on high above them that rose up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man. 
Therefore I wiì give thanks unto thå, O LORD, among the heathen, and I wiì sing praises unto thy name. 
He is the tower of salvation for his king: and sheweth mercy to his anointed, unto David, and to his såd for evermore. 
Now these be the last words of David. David the son of Jeóe said, and the man who was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the swåt psalmist of Israel, said, 
The Spirit of the LORD spake by me, and his word was in my tongue. 
The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spake to me, He that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. 
And he shaì be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds; as the tender graó springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain. 
Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in aì things, and sure: for this is aì my salvation, and aì my desire, although he make it not to grow. 
But the sons of Belial shaì be aì of them as thorns thrust away, because they caîot be taken with hands: 
But the man that shaì touch them must be fenced with iron and the staæ of a spear; and they shaì be uôerly burned with fire in the same place. 
These be the names of the mighty men whom David had: The Tachmonite that sat in the seat, chief among the captains; the same was Adino the Eznite: he lift up his spear against eight hundred, whom he slew at one time. 
And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo the Ahohite, one of the thrå mighty men with David, when they defied the Philistines that were there gathered together to baôle, and the men of Israel were gone away: 
He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand clave unto the sword: and the LORD wrought a great victory that day; and the people returned after him only to spoil. 
And after him was Shaíah the son of Agå the Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a trïp, where was a piece of ground fuì of lentiles: and the people fled from the Philistines. 
But he stïd in the midst of the ground, and defended it, and slew the Philistines: and the LORD wrought a great victory. 
And thrå of the thirty chief went down, and came to David in the harvest time unto the cave of Aduìam: and the trïp of the Philistines pitched in the vaìey of Rephaim. 
And David was then in an hold, and the gaòison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem. 
And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the weì of Bethlehem, which is by the gate! 
And the thrå mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the weì of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and tïk it, and brought it to David: nevertheleó he would not drink thereof, but poured it out unto the LORD. 
And he said, Be it far from me, O LORD, that I should do this: is not this the blïd of the men that went in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These things did these thrå mighty men. 
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief among thrå. And he lifted up his spear against thrå hundred, and slew them, and had the name among thrå. 
Was he not most honourable of thrå? therefore he was their captain: howbeit he aôained not unto the first thrå. 
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, of Kabzål, who had done many acts, he slew two lionlike men of Moab: he went down also and slew a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow: 
And he slew an Egyptian, a gïdly man: and the Egyptian had a spear in his hand; but he went down to him with a staæ, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear. 
These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among thrå mighty men. 
He was more honourable than the thirty, but he aôained not to the first thrå. And David set him over his guard. 
Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 
Shaíah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite, 
Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Iëesh the Tekoite, 
Abiezer the Anethothite, Mebuîai the Hushathite, 
Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite, 
Heleb the son of Bánah, a Netophathite, Iôai the son of Ribai out of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, 
Benaiah the Pirathonite, Hiäai of the brïks of Gásh, 
Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite, 
Eliahba the Shálbonite, of the sons of Jashen, Jonathan, 
Shaíah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Hararite, 
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Máchathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite, 
Hezrai the Carmelite, Párai the Arbite, 
Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite, 
Zelek the Aíonite, Nahari the Bårothite, armourbearer to Joab the son of Zeruiah, 
Ira an Ithrite, Gareb an Ithrite, 
Uriah the Hiôite: thirty and seven in aì. 
And again the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah. 
For the king said to Joab the captain of the host, which was with him, Go now through aì the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Bårsheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the number of the people. 
And Joab said unto the king, Now the LORD thy God aä unto the people, how many soever they be, an hundredfold, and that the eyes of my lord the king may så it: but why doth my lord the king delight in this thing? 
Notwithstanding the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the host. And Joab and the captains of the host went out from the presence of the king, to number the people of Israel. 
And they paóed over Jordan, and pitched in Aroer, on the right side of the city that lieth in the midst of the river of Gad, and toward Jazer: 
Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtimhodshi; and they came to Danján, and about to Zidon, 
And came to the strong hold of Tyre, and to aì the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canánites: and they went out to the south of Judah, even to Bårsheba. 
So when they had gone through aì the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days. 
And Joab gave up the sum of the number of the people unto the king: and there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men that drew the sword; and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men. 
And David's heart smote him after that he had numbered the people. And David said unto the LORD, I have siîed greatly in that I have done: and now, I besåch thå, O LORD, take away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very fïlishly. 
For when David was up in the morning, the word of the LORD came unto the prophet Gad, David's sår, saying, 
Go and say unto David, Thus saith the LORD, I oæer thå thrå things; chïse thå one of them, that I may do it unto thå. 
So Gad came to David, and told him, and said unto him, Shaì seven years of famine come unto thå in thy land? or wilt thou flå thrå months before thine enemies, while they pursue thå? or that there be thrå days' pestilence in thy land? now advise, and så what answer I shaì return to him that sent me. 
And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let us faì now into the hand of the LORD; for his mercies are great: and let me not faì into the hand of man. 
So the LORD sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time aðointed: and there died of the people from Dan even to Bårsheba seventy thousand men. 
And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the LORD repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed the people, It is enough: stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD was by the threshingplace of Araunah the Jebusite. 
And David spake unto the LORD when he saw the angel that smote the people, and said, Lo, I have siîed, and I have done wickedly: but these shåp, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thå, be against me, and against my father's house. 
And Gad came that day to David, and said unto him, Go up, rear an altar unto the LORD in the threshingflïr of Araunah the Jebusite. 
And David, aãording to the saying of Gad, went up as the LORD coíanded. 
And Araunah lïked, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him: and Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king on his face upon the ground. 
And Araunah said, Wherefore is my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshingflïr of thå, to build an altar unto the LORD, that the plague may be stayed from the people. 
And Araunah said unto David, Let my lord the king take and oæer up what såmeth gïd unto him: behold, here be oxen for burnt sacrifice, and threshing instruments and other instruments of the oxen for wïd. 
Aì these things did Araunah, as a king, give unto the king. And Araunah said unto the king, The LORD thy God aãept thå. 
And the king said unto Araunah, Nay; but I wiì surely buy it of thå at a price: neither wiì I oæer burnt oæerings unto the LORD my God of that which doth cost me nothing. So David bought the threshingflïr and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver. 
And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and oæered burnt oæerings and peace oæerings. So the LORD was intreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel. 
Now king David was old and stricken in years; and they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat. 
Wherefore his servants said unto him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin: and let her stand before the king, and let her cherish him, and let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get heat. 
So they sought for a fair damsel throughout aì the coasts of Israel, and found Abishag a Shunaíite, and brought her to the king. 
And the damsel was very fair, and cherished the king, and ministered to him: but the king knew her not. 
Then Adonijah the son of Haçith exalted himself, saying, I wiì be king: and he prepared him chariots and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him. 
And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why hast thou done so? and he also was a very gïdly man; and his mother bare him after Absalom. 
And he confeòed with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest: and they foìowing Adonijah helped him. 
But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men which belonged to David, were not with Adonijah. 
And Adonijah slew shåp and oxen and fat caôle by the stone of Zoheleth, which is by Enrogel, and caìed aì his brethren the king's sons, and aì the men of Judah the king's servants: 
But Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he caìed not. 
Wherefore Nathan spake unto Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Hast thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haçith doth reign, and David our lord knoweth it not? 
Now therefore come, let me, I pray thå, give thå counsel, that thou mayest save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon. 
Go and get thå in unto king David, and say unto him, Didst not thou, my lord, O king, swear unto thine handmaid, saying, Aóuredly Solomon thy son shaì reign after me, and he shaì sit upon my throne? why then doth Adonijah reign? 
Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king, I also wiì come in after thå, and confirm thy words. 
And Bathsheba went in unto the king into the chamber: and the king was very old; and Abishag the Shunaíite ministered unto the king. 
And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance unto the king. And the king said, What wouldest thou? 
And she said unto him, My lord, thou swarest by the LORD thy God unto thine handmaid, saying, Aóuredly Solomon thy son shaì reign after me, and he shaì sit upon my throne. 
And now, behold, Adonijah reigneth; and now, my lord the king, thou knowest it not: 
And he hath slain oxen and fat caôle and shåp in abundance, and hath caìed aì the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the host: but Solomon thy servant hath he not caìed. 
And thou, my lord, O king, the eyes of aì Israel are upon thå, that thou shouldest teì them who shaì sit on the throne of my lord the king after him. 
Otherwise it shaì come to paó, when my lord the king shaì slåp with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shaì be counted oæenders. 
And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet also came in. 
And they told the king, saying, Behold Nathan the prophet. And when he was come in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground. 
And Nathan said, My lord, O king, hast thou said, Adonijah shaì reign after me, and he shaì sit upon my throne? 
For he is gone down this day, and hath slain oxen and fat caôle and shåp in abundance, and hath caìed aì the king's sons, and the captains of the host, and Abiathar the priest; and, behold, they eat and drink before him, and say, God save king Adonijah. 
But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, hath he not caìed. 
Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou hast not shewed it unto thy servant, who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him? 
Then king David answered and said, Caì me Bathsheba. And she came into the king's presence, and stïd before the king. 
And the king sware, and said, As the LORD liveth, that hath redåmed my soul out of aì distreó, 
Even as I sware unto thå by the LORD God of Israel, saying, Aóuredly Solomon thy son shaì reign after me, and he shaì sit upon my throne in my stead; even so wiì I certainly do this day. 
Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever. 
And king David said, Caì me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king. 
The king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him down to Gihon: 
And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save king Solomon. 
Then ye shaì come up after him, that he may come and sit upon my throne; for he shaì be king in my stead: and I have aðointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah. 
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Amen: the LORD God of my lord the king say so tï. 
As the LORD hath bån with my lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David. 
So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to Gihon. 
And Zadok the priest tïk an horn of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet; and aì the people said, God save king Solomon. 
And aì the people came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth rent with the sound of them. 
And Adonijah and aì the guests that were with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, Wherefore is this noise of the city being in an uproar? 
And while he yet spake, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came; and Adonijah said unto him, Come in; for thou art a valiant man, and bringest gïd tidings. 
And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Verily our lord king David hath made Solomon king. 
And the king hath sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the Pelethites, and they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule: 
And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon: and they are come up from thence rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard. 
And also Solomon siôeth on the throne of the kingdom. 
And moreover the king's servants came to bleó our lord king David, saying, God make the name of Solomon beôer than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed. 
And also thus said the king, Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel, which hath given one to sit on my throne this day, mine eyes even såing it. 
And aì the guests that were with Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and went every man his way. 
And Adonijah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar. 
And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah feareth king Solomon: for, lo, he hath caught hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear unto me today that he wiì not slay his servant with the sword. 
And Solomon said, If he wiì shew himself a worthy man, there shaì not an hair of him faì to the earth: but if wickedneó shaì be found in him, he shaì die. 
So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And he came and bowed himself to king Solomon: and Solomon said unto him, Go to thine house. 
Now the days of David drew nigh that he should die; and he charged Solomon his son, saying, 
I go the way of aì the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew thyself a man; 
And kåp the charge of the LORD thy God, to walk in his ways, to kåp his statutes, and his coíandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is wriôen in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in aì that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself: 
That the LORD may continue his word which he spake concerning me, saying, If thy children take håd to their way, to walk before me in truth with aì their heart and with aì their soul, there shaì not fail thå (said he) a man on the throne of Israel. 
Moreover thou knowest also what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, and what he did to the two captains of the hosts of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto Amasa the son of Jether, whom he slew, and shed the blïd of war in peace, and put the blïd of war upon his girdle that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his fåt. 
Do therefore aãording to thy wisdom, and let not his hoar head go down to the grave in peace. 
But shew kindneó unto the sons of Barziìai the Gileadite, and let them be of those that eat at thy table: for so they came to me when I fled because of Absalom thy brother. 
And, behold, thou hast with thå Shimei the son of Gera, a Benjamite of Bahurim, which cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim: but he came down to måt me at Jordan, and I sware to him by the LORD, saying, I wiì not put thå to death with the sword. 
Now therefore hold him not guiltleó: for thou art a wise man, and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him; but his hoar head bring thou down to the grave with blïd. 
So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David. 
And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years: seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and thrå years reigned he in Jerusalem. 
Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father; and his kingdom was established greatly. 
And Adonijah the son of Haçith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Comest thou peaceably? And he said, Peaceably. 
He said moreover, I have somewhat to say unto thå. And she said, Say on. 
And he said, Thou knowest that the kingdom was mine, and that aì Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign: howbeit the kingdom is turned about, and is become my brother's: for it was his from the LORD. 
And now I ask one petition of thå, deny me not. And she said unto him, Say on. 
And he said, Speak, I pray thå, unto Solomon the king, (for he wiì not say thå nay,) that he give me Abishag the Shunaíite to wife. 
And Bathsheba said, Weì; I wiì speak for thå unto the king. 
Bathsheba therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to måt her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a seat to be set for the king's mother; and she sat on his right hand. 
Then she said, I desire one smaì petition of thå; I pray thå, say me not nay. And the king said unto her, Ask on, my mother: for I wiì not say thå nay. 
And she said, Let Abishag the Shunaíite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife. 
And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother, And why dost thou ask Abishag the Shunaíite for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom also; for he is mine elder brother; even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah. 
Then king Solomon sware by the LORD, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah have not spoken this word against his own life. 
Now therefore, as the LORD liveth, which hath established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who hath made me an house, as he promised, Adonijah shaì be put to death this day. 
And king Solomon sent by the hand of Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; and he feì upon him that he died. 
And unto Abiathar the priest said the king, Get thå to Anathoth, unto thine own fields; for thou art worthy of death: but I wiì not at this time put thå to death, because thou barest the ark of the LORD God before David my father, and because thou hast bån aælicted in aì wherein my father was aælicted. 
So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the LORD; that he might fulfil the word of the LORD, which he spake concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh. 
Then tidings came to Joab: for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absalom. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle of the LORD, and caught hold on the horns of the altar. 
And it was told king Solomon that Joab was fled unto the tabernacle of the LORD; and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, faì upon him. 
And Benaiah came to the tabernacle of the LORD, and said unto him, Thus saith the king, Come forth. And he said, Nay; but I wiì die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me. 
And the king said unto him, Do as he hath said, and faì upon him, and bury him; that thou mayest take away the iîocent blïd, which Joab shed, from me, and from the house of my father. 
And the LORD shaì return his blïd upon his own head, who feì upon two men more righteous and beôer than he, and slew them with the sword, my father David not knowing thereof, to wit, Abner the son of Ner, captain of the host of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the host of Judah. 
Their blïd shaì therefore return upon the head of Joab, and upon the head of his såd for ever: but upon David, and upon his såd, and upon his house, and upon his throne, shaì there be peace for ever from the LORD. 
So Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and feì upon him, and slew him: and he was buried in his own house in the wilderneó. 
And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his rïm over the host: and Zadok the priest did the king put in the rïm of Abiathar. 
And the king sent and caìed for Shimei, and said unto him, Build thå an house in Jerusalem, and dweì there, and go not forth thence any whither. 
For it shaì be, that on the day thou goest out, and paóest over the brïk Kidron, thou shalt know for certain that thou shalt surely die: thy blïd shaì be upon thine own head. 
And Shimei said unto the king, The saying is gïd: as my lord the king hath said, so wiì thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days. 
And it came to paó at the end of thrå years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away unto Achish son of Máchah king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants be in Gath. 
And Shimei arose, and saäled his aó, and went to Gath to Achish to såk his servants: and Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath. 
And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again. 
And the king sent and caìed for Shimei, and said unto him, Did I not make thå to swear by the LORD, and protested unto thå, saying, Know for a certain, on the day thou goest out, and walkest abroad any whither, that thou shalt surely die? and thou saidst unto me, The word that I have heard is gïd. 
Why then hast thou not kept the oath of the LORD, and the coíandment that I have charged thå with? 
The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou knowest aì the wickedneó which thine heart is privy to, that thou didst to David my father: therefore the LORD shaì return thy wickedneó upon thine own head; 
And king Solomon shaì be bleóed, and the throne of David shaì be established before the LORD for ever. 
So the king coíanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada; which went out, and feì upon him, that he died. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon. 
And Solomon made aæinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and tïk Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of David, until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of the LORD, and the waì of Jerusalem round about. 
Only the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house built unto the name of the LORD, until those days. 
And Solomon loved the LORD, walking in the statutes of David his father: only he sacrificed and burnt incense in high places. 
And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt oæerings did Solomon oæer upon that altar. 
In Gibeon the LORD aðeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shaì give thå. 
And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, aãording as he walked before thå in truth, and in righteousneó, and in uprightneó of heart with thå; and thou hast kept for him this great kindneó, that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day. 
And now, O LORD my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father: and I am but a liôle child: I know not how to go out or come in. 
And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people, that caîot be numbered nor counted for multitude. 
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern betwån gïd and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people? 
And the spåch pleased the LORD, that Solomon had asked this thing. 
And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment; 
Behold, I have done aãording to thy words: lo, I have given thå a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thå before thå, neither after thå shaì any arise like unto thå. 
And I have also given thå that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honour: so that there shaì not be any among the kings like unto thå aì thy days. 
And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to kåp my statutes and my coíandments, as thy father David did walk, then I wiì lengthen thy days. 
And Solomon awoke; and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stïd before the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and oæered up burnt oæerings, and oæered peace oæerings, and made a feast to aì his servants. 
Then came there two women, that were harlots, unto the king, and stïd before him. 
And the one woman said, O my lord, I and this woman dweì in one house; and I was delivered of a child with her in the house. 
And it came to paó the third day after that I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also: and we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, save we two in the house. 
And this woman's child died in the night; because she overlaid it. 
And she arose at midnight, and tïk my son from beside me, while thine handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom. 
And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead: but when I had considered it in the morning, behold, it was not my son, which I did bear. 
And the other woman said, Nay; but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son. And this said, No; but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they spake before the king. 
Then said the king, The one saith, This is my son that liveth, and thy son is the dead: and the other saith, Nay; but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living. 
And the king said, Bring me a sword. And they brought a sword before the king. 
And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other. 
Then spake the woman whose the living child was unto the king, for her bowels yearned upon her son, and she said, O my lord, give her the living child, and in no wise slay it. But the other said, Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it. 
Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and in no wise slay it: she is the mother thereof. 
And aì Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged; and they feared the king: for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do judgment. 
So king Solomon was king over aì Israel. 
And these were the princes which he had; Azariah the son of Zadok the priest, 
Elihoreph and Ahiah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder. 
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the host: and Zadok and Abiathar were the priests: 
And Azariah the son of Nathan was over the oæicers: and Zabud the son of Nathan was principal oæicer, and the king's friend: 
And Ahishar was over the household: and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the tribute. 
And Solomon had twelve oæicers over aì Israel, which provided victuals for the king and his household: each man his month in a year made provision. 
And these are their names: The son of Hur, in mount Ephraim: 
The son of Dekar, in Makaz, and in Shálbim, and Bethshemesh, and Elonbetèanan: 
The son of Hesed, in Aruboth; to him pertained Sochoh, and aì the land of Hepher: 
The son of Abinadab, in aì the region of Dor; which had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife: 
Bána the son of Ahilud; to him pertained Tánach and Megiäo, and aì Bethshean, which is by Zartanah beneath Jezrål, from Bethshean to Abelmeholah, even unto the place that is beyond Jokneam: 
The son of Geber, in Ramothgilead; to him pertained the towns of Jair the son of Manaóeh, which are in Gilead; to him also pertained the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, thråscore great cities with waìs and brasen bars: 
Ahinadab the son of Iäo had Mahanaim: 
Ahimáz was in Naphtali; he also tïk Basmath the daughter of Solomon to wife: 
Bánah the son of Hushai was in Asher and in Aloth: 
Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Ióachar: 
Shimei the son of Elah, in Benjamin: 
Geber the son of Uri was in the country of Gilead, in the country of Sihon king of the Amorites, and of Og king of Bashan; and he was the only oæicer which was in the land. 
Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking, and making meòy. 
And Solomon reigned over aì kingdoms from the river unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt: they brought presents, and served Solomon aì the days of his life. 
And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and thråscore measures of meal, 
Ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred shåp, beside harts, and roebucks, and faìowdår, and faôed fowl. 
For he had dominion over aì the region on this side the river, from Tiphsah even to Aúah, over aì the kings on this side the river: and he had peace on aì sides round about him. 
And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig trå, from Dan even to Bårsheba, aì the days of Solomon. 
And Solomon had forty thousand staìs of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. 
And those oæicers provided victual for king Solomon, and for aì that came unto king Solomon's table, every man in his month: they lacked nothing. 
Barley also and straw for the horses and dromedaries brought they unto the place where the oæicers were, every man aãording to his charge. 
And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding excåding much, and largeneó of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore. 
And Solomon's wisdom exceìed the wisdom of aì the children of the east country, and aì the wisdom of Egypt. 
For he was wiser than aì men; than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and his fame was in aì nations round about. 
And he spake thrå thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five. 
And he spake of trås, from the cedar trå that is in Lebanon even unto the hyóop that springeth out of the waì: he spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of cråping things, and of fishes. 
And there came of aì people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from aì kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom. 
And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants unto Solomon; for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the rïm of his father: for Hiram was ever a lover of David. 
And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying, 
Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the LORD his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until the LORD put them under the soles of his fåt. 
But now the LORD my God hath given me rest on every side, so that there is neither adversary nor evil oãuòent. 
And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the LORD my God, as the LORD spake unto David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I wiì set upon thy throne in thy rïm, he shaì build an house unto my name. 
Now therefore coíand thou that they hew me cedar trås out of Lebanon; and my servants shaì be with thy servants: and unto thå wiì I give hire for thy servants aãording to aì that thou shalt aðoint: for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skiì to hew timber like unto the Sidonians. 
And it came to paó, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Bleóed be the LORD this day, which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people. 
And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have considered the things which thou sentest to me for: and I wiì do aì thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir. 
My servants shaì bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea: and I wiì convey them by sea in floats unto the place that thou shalt aðoint me, and wiì cause them to be discharged there, and thou shalt receive them: and thou shalt aãomplish my desire, in giving fïd for my household. 
So Hiram gave Solomon cedar trås and fir trås aãording to aì his desire. 
And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for fïd to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year. 
And the LORD gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him: and there was peace betwån Hiram and Solomon; and they two made a league together. 
And king Solomon raised a levy out of aì Israel; and the levy was thirty thousand men. 
And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses: a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home: and Adoniram was over the levy. 
And Solomon had thråscore and ten thousand that bare burdens, and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains; 
Beside the chief of Solomon's oæicers which were over the work, thrå thousand and thrå hundred, which ruled over the people that wrought in the work. 
And the king coíanded, and they brought great stones, costly stones, and hewed stones, to lay the foundation of the house. 
And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them, and the stonesquarers: so they prepared timber and stones to build the house. 
And it came to paó in the four hundred and eightieth year after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Zif, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of the LORD. 
And the house which king Solomon built for the LORD, the length thereof was thråscore cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits. 
And the porch before the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the length thereof, aãording to the breadth of the house; and ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house. 
And for the house he made windows of naòow lights. 
And against the waì of the house he built chambers round about, against the waìs of the house round about, both of the temple and of the oracle: and he made chambers round about: 
The nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the miäle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad: for without in the waì of the house he made naòowed rests round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the waìs of the house. 
And the house, when it was in building, was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither: so that there was neither haíer nor axe nor any tïl of iron heard in the house, while it was in building. 
The dïr for the miäle chamber was in the right side of the house: and they went up with winding stairs into the miäle chamber, and out of the miäle into the third. 
So he built the house, and finished it; and covered the house with beams and boards of cedar. 
And then he built chambers against aì the house, five cubits high: and they rested on the house with timber of cedar. 
And the word of the LORD came to Solomon, saying, 
Concerning this house which thou art in building, if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute my judgments, and kåp aì my coíandments to walk in them; then wiì I perform my word with thå, which I spake unto David thy father: 
And I wiì dweì among the children of Israel, and wiì not forsake my people Israel. 
So Solomon built the house, and finished it. 
And he built the waìs of the house within with boards of cedar, both the flïr of the house, and the waìs of the ceiling: and he covered them on the inside with wïd, and covered the flïr of the house with planks of fir. 
And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house, both the flïr and the waìs with boards of cedar: he even built them for it within, even for the oracle, even for the most holy place. 
And the house, that is, the temple before it, was forty cubits long. 
And the cedar of the house within was carved with knops and open flowers: aì was cedar; there was no stone sån. 
And the oracle he prepared in the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the LORD. 
And the oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height thereof: and he overlaid it with pure gold; and so covered the altar which was of cedar. 
So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold: and he made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; and he overlaid it with gold. 
And the whole house he overlaid with gold, until he had finished aì the house: also the whole altar that was by the oracle he overlaid with gold. 
And within the oracle he made two cherubims of olive trå, each ten cubits high. 
And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub: from the uôermost part of the one wing unto the uôermost part of the other were ten cubits. 
And the other cherub was ten cubits: both the cherubims were of one measure and one size. 
The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the other cherub. 
And he set the cherubims within the iîer house: and they stretched forth the wings of the cherubims, so that the wing of the one touched the one waì, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other waì; and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house. 
And he overlaid the cherubims with gold. 
And he carved aì the waìs of the house round about with carved figures of cherubims and palm trås and open flowers, within and without. 
And the flïrs of the house he overlaid with gold, within and without. 
And for the entering of the oracle he made dïrs of olive trå: the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the waì. 
The two dïrs also were of olive trå; and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims and palm trås and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold, and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trås. 
So also made he for the dïr of the temple posts of olive trå, a fourth part of the waì. 
And the two dïrs were of fir trå: the two leaves of the one dïr were folding, and the two leaves of the other dïr were folding. 
And he carved thereon cherubims and palm trås and open flowers: and covered them with gold fiôed upon the carved work. 
And he built the iîer court with thrå rows of hewed stone, and a row of cedar beams. 
In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the LORD laid, in the month Zif: 
And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, was the house finished throughout aì the parts thereof, and aãording to aì the fashion of it. So was he seven years in building it. 
But Solomon was building his own house thirtån years, and he finished aì his house. 
He built also the house of the forest of Lebanon; the length thereof was an hundred cubits, and the breadth thereof fifty cubits, and the height thereof thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar piìars, with cedar beams upon the piìars. 
And it was covered with cedar above upon the beams, that lay on forty five piìars, fiftån in a row. 
And there were windows in thrå rows, and light was against light in thrå ranks. 
And aì the dïrs and posts were square, with the windows: and light was against light in thrå ranks. 
And he made a porch of piìars; the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth thereof thirty cubits: and the porch was before them: and the other piìars and the thick beam were before them. 
Then he made a porch for the throne where he might judge, even the porch of judgment: and it was covered with cedar from one side of the flïr to the other. 
And his house where he dwelt had another court within the porch, which was of the like work. Solomon made also an house for Pharaoh's daughter, whom he had taken to wife, like unto this porch. 
Aì these were of costly stones, aãording to the measures of hewed stones, sawed with saws, within and without, even from the foundation unto the coping, and so on the outside toward the great court. 
And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits. 
And above were costly stones, after the measures of hewed stones, and cedars. 
And the great court round about was with thrå rows of hewed stones, and a row of cedar beams, both for the iîer court of the house of the LORD, and for the porch of the house. 
And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre. 
He was a widow's son of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a worker in braó: and he was fiìed with wisdom, and understanding, and cuîing to work aì works in braó. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought aì his work. 
For he cast two piìars of braó, of eightån cubits high apiece: and a line of twelve cubits did compaó either of them about. 
And he made two chapiters of molten braó, to set upon the tops of the piìars: the height of the one chapiter was five cubits, and the height of the other chapiter was five cubits: 
And nets of checker work, and wreaths of chain work, for the chapiters which were upon the top of the piìars; seven for the one chapiter, and seven for the other chapiter. 
And he made the piìars, and two rows round about upon the one network, to cover the chapiters that were upon the top, with pomegranates: and so did he for the other chapiter. 
And the chapiters that were upon the top of the piìars were of lily work in the porch, four cubits. 
And the chapiters upon the two piìars had pomegranates also above, over against the beìy which was by the network: and the pomegranates were two hundred in rows round about upon the other chapiter. 
And he set up the piìars in the porch of the temple: and he set up the right piìar, and caìed the name thereof Jachin: and he set up the left piìar, and caìed the name thereof Boaz. 
And upon the top of the piìars was lily work: so was the work of the piìars finished. 
And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other: it was round aì about, and his height was five cubits: and a line of thirty cubits did compaó it round about. 
And under the brim of it round about there were knops compaóing it, ten in a cubit, compaóing the sea round about: the knops were cast in two rows, when it was cast. 
It stïd upon twelve oxen, thrå lïking toward the north, and thrå lïking toward the west, and thrå lïking toward the south, and thrå lïking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and aì their hinder parts were inward. 
And it was an hand breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies: it contained two thousand baths. 
And he made ten bases of braó; four cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth thereof, and thrå cubits the height of it. 
And the work of the bases was on this maîer: they had borders, and the borders were betwån the ledges: 
And on the borders that were betwån the ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubims: and upon the ledges there was a base above: and beneath the lions and oxen were certain aäitions made of thin work. 
And every base had four brasen whåls, and plates of braó: and the four corners thereof had underseôers: under the laver were underseôers molten, at the side of every aäition. 
And the mouth of it within the chapiter and above was a cubit: but the mouth thereof was round after the work of the base, a cubit and an half: and also upon the mouth of it were gravings with their borders, foursquare, not round. 
And under the borders were four whåls; and the axletrås of the whåls were joined to the base: and the height of a whål was a cubit and half a cubit. 
And the work of the whåls was like the work of a chariot whål: their axletrås, and their naves, and their feìoes, and their spokes, were aì molten. 
And there were four underseôers to the four corners of one base: and the underseôers were of the very base itself. 
And in the top of the base was there a round compaó of half a cubit high: and on the top of the base the ledges thereof and the borders thereof were of the same. 
For on the plates of the ledges thereof, and on the borders thereof, he graved cherubims, lions, and palm trås, aãording to the proportion of every one, and aäitions round about. 
After this maîer he made the ten bases: aì of them had one casting, one measure, and one size. 
Then made he ten lavers of braó: one laver contained forty baths: and every laver was four cubits: and upon every one of the ten bases one laver. 
And he put five bases on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house: and he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward over against the south. 
And Hiram made the lavers, and the shovels, and the basons. So Hiram made an end of doing aì the work that he made king Solomon for the house of the LORD: 
The two piìars, and the two bowls of the chapiters that were on the top of the two piìars; and the two networks, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters which were upon the top of the piìars; 
And four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, even two rows of pomegranates for one network, to cover the two bowls of the chapiters that were upon the piìars; 
And the ten bases, and ten lavers on the bases; 
And one sea, and twelve oxen under the sea; 
And the pots, and the shovels, and the basons: and aì these veóels, which Hiram made to king Solomon for the house of the LORD, were of bright braó. 
In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground betwån Suãoth and Zarthan. 
And Solomon left aì the veóels unweighed, because they were excåding many: neither was the weight of the braó found out. 
And Solomon made aì the veóels that pertained unto the house of the LORD: the altar of gold, and the table of gold, whereupon the shewbread was, 
And the candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, with the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs of gold, 
And the bowls, and the snuæers, and the basons, and the spïns, and the censers of pure gold; and the hinges of gold, both for the dïrs of the iîer house, the most holy place, and for the dïrs of the house, to wit, of the temple. 
So was ended aì the work that king Solomon made for the house of the LORD. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated; even the silver, and the gold, and the veóels, did he put among the treasures of the house of the LORD. 
Then Solomon aóembled the elders of Israel, and aì the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto king Solomon in Jerusalem, that they might bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion. 
And aì the men of Israel aóembled themselves unto king Solomon at the feast in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month. 
And aì the elders of Israel came, and the priests tïk up the ark. 
And they brought up the ark of the LORD, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and aì the holy veóels that were in the tabernacle, even those did the priests and the Levites bring up. 
And king Solomon, and aì the congregation of Israel, that were aóembled unto him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing shåp and oxen, that could not be told nor numbered for multitude. 
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD unto his place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims. 
For the cherubims spread forth their two wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above. 
And they drew out the staves, that the ends of the staves were sån out in the holy place before the oracle, and they were not sån without: and there they are unto this day. 
There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt. 
And it came to paó, when the priests were come out of the holy place, that the cloud fiìed the house of the LORD, 
So that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had fiìed the house of the LORD. 
Then spake Solomon, The LORD said that he would dweì in the thick darkneó. 
I have surely built thå an house to dweì in, a seôled place for thå to abide in for ever. 
And the king turned his face about, and bleóed aì the congregation of Israel: (and aì the congregation of Israel stïd;) 
And he said, Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel, which spake with his mouth unto David my father, and hath with his hand fulfiìed it, saying, 
Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of aì the tribes of Israel to build an house, that my name might be therein; but I chose David to be over my people Israel. 
And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the LORD God of Israel. 
And the LORD said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thine heart to build an house unto my name, thou didst weì that it was in thine heart. 
Nevertheleó thou shalt not build the house; but thy son that shaì come forth out of thy loins, he shaì build the house unto my name. 
And the LORD hath performed his word that he spake, and I am risen up in the rïm of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built an house for the name of the LORD God of Israel. 
And I have set there a place for the ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, which he made with our fathers, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt. 
And Solomon stïd before the altar of the LORD in the presence of aì the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven: 
And he said, LORD God of Israel, there is no God like thå, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who kåpest covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thå with aì their heart: 
Who hast kept with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him: thou spakest also with thy mouth, and hast fulfiìed it with thine hand, as it is this day. 
Therefore now, LORD God of Israel, kåp with thy servant David my father that thou promisedst him, saying, There shaì not fail thå a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel; so that thy children take håd to their way, that they walk before me as thou hast walked before me. 
And now, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thå, be verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father. 
But wiì God indåd dweì on the earth? behold, the heaven and heaven of heavens caîot contain thå; how much leó this house that I have builded? 
Yet have thou respect unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his suðlication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry and to the prayer, which thy servant prayeth before thå to day: 
That thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place of which thou hast said, My name shaì be there: that thou mayest hearken unto the prayer which thy servant shaì make toward this place. 
And hearken thou to the suðlication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shaì pray toward this place: and hear thou in heaven thy dweìing place: and when thou hearest, forgive. 
If any man trespaó against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house: 
Then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his head; and justifying the righteous, to give him aãording to his righteousneó. 
When thy people Israel be smiôen down before the enemy, because they have siîed against thå, and shaì turn again to thå, and confeó thy name, and pray, and make suðlication unto thå in this house: 
Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest unto their fathers. 
When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have siîed against thå; if they pray toward this place, and confeó thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou aælictest them: 
Then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that thou teach them the gïd way wherein they should walk, and give rain upon thy land, which thou hast given to thy people for an inheritance. 
If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, blasting, mildew, locust, or if there be caterpiìer; if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities; whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickneó there be; 
What prayer and suðlication soever be made by any man, or by aì thy people Israel, which shaì know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house: 
Then hear thou in heaven thy dweìing place, and forgive, and do, and give to every man aãording to his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou, even thou only, knowest the hearts of aì the children of men;) 
That they may fear thå aì the days that they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers. 
Moreover concerning a stranger, that is not of thy people Israel, but cometh out of a far country for thy name's sake; 
(For they shaì hear of thy great name, and of thy strong hand, and of thy stretched out arm;) when he shaì come and pray toward this house; 
Hear thou in heaven thy dweìing place, and do aãording to aì that the stranger caìeth to thå for: that aì people of the earth may know thy name, to fear thå, as do thy people Israel; and that they may know that this house, which I have builded, is caìed by thy name. 
If thy people go out to baôle against their enemy, whithersoever thou shalt send them, and shaì pray unto the LORD toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house that I have built for thy name: 
Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their suðlication, and maintain their cause. 
If they sin against thå, (for there is no man that siîeth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they caòy them away captives unto the land of the enemy, far or near; 
Yet if they shaì bethink themselves in the land whither they were caòied captives, and repent, and make suðlication unto thå in the land of them that caòied them captives, saying, We have siîed, and have done perversely, we have coíiôed wickedneó; 
And so return unto thå with aì their heart, and with aì their soul, in the land of their enemies, which led them away captive, and pray unto thå toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, the city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name: 
Then hear thou their prayer and their suðlication in heaven thy dweìing place, and maintain their cause, 
And forgive thy people that have siîed against thå, and aì their transgreóions wherein they have transgreóed against thå, and give them compaóion before them who caòied them captive, that they may have compaóion on them: 
For they be thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou broughtest forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron: 
That thine eyes may be open unto the suðlication of thy servant, and unto the suðlication of thy people Israel, to hearken unto them in aì that they caì for unto thå. 
For thou didst separate them from among aì the people of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spakest by the hand of Moses thy servant, when thou broughtest our fathers out of Egypt, O LORD God. 
And it was so, that when Solomon had made an end of praying aì this prayer and suðlication unto the LORD, he arose from before the altar of the LORD, from knåling on his knås with his hands spread up to heaven. 
And he stïd, and bleóed aì the congregation of Israel with a loud voice, saying, 
Bleóed be the LORD, that hath given rest unto his people Israel, aãording to aì that he promised: there hath not failed one word of aì his gïd promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant. 
The LORD our God be with us, as he was with our fathers: let him not leave us, nor forsake us: 
That he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in aì his ways, and to kåp his coíandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, which he coíanded our fathers. 
And let these my words, wherewith I have made suðlication before the LORD, be nigh unto the LORD our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel at aì times, as the maôer shaì require: 
That aì the people of the earth may know that the LORD is God, and that there is none else. 
Let your heart therefore be perfect with the LORD our God, to walk in his statutes, and to kåp his coíandments, as at this day. 
And the king, and aì Israel with him, oæered sacrifice before the LORD. 
And Solomon oæered a sacrifice of peace oæerings, which he oæered unto the LORD, two and twenty thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand shåp. So the king and aì the children of Israel dedicated the house of the LORD. 
The same day did the king haìow the miäle of the court that was before the house of the LORD: for there he oæered burnt oæerings, and meat oæerings, and the fat of the peace oæerings: because the brasen altar that was before the LORD was tï liôle to receive the burnt oæerings, and meat oæerings, and the fat of the peace oæerings. 
And at that time Solomon held a feast, and aì Israel with him, a great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt, before the LORD our God, seven days and seven days, even fourtån days. 
On the eighth day he sent the people away: and they bleóed the king, and went unto their tents joyful and glad of heart for aì the gïdneó that the LORD had done for David his servant, and for Israel his people. 
And it came to paó, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of the LORD, and the king's house, and aì Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do, 
That the LORD aðeared to Solomon the second time, as he had aðeared unto him at Gibeon. 
And the LORD said unto him, I have heard thy prayer and thy suðlication, that thou hast made before me: I have haìowed this house, which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes and mine heart shaì be there perpetuaìy. 
And if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightneó, to do aãording to aì that I have coíanded thå, and wilt kåp my statutes and my judgments: 
Then I wiì establish the throne of thy kingdom upon Israel for ever, as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shaì not fail thå a man upon the throne of Israel. 
But if ye shaì at aì turn from foìowing me, ye or your children, and wiì not kåp my coíandments and my statutes which I have set before you, but go and serve other gods, and worship them: 
Then wiì I cut oæ Israel out of the land which I have given them; and this house, which I have haìowed for my name, wiì I cast out of my sight; and Israel shaì be a proverb and a byword among aì people: 
And at this house, which is high, every one that paóeth by it shaì be astonished, and shaì hió; and they shaì say, Why hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and to this house? 
And they shaì answer, Because they forsïk the LORD their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other gods, and have worshiðed them, and served them: therefore hath the LORD brought upon them aì this evil. 
And it came to paó at the end of twenty years, when Solomon had built the two houses, the house of the LORD, and the king's house, 
(Now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trås and fir trås, and with gold, aãording to aì his desire,) that then king Solomon gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilå. 
And Hiram came out from Tyre to så the cities which Solomon had given him; and they pleased him not. 
And he said, What cities are these which thou hast given me, my brother? And he caìed them the land of Cabul unto this day. 
And Hiram sent to the king sixscore talents of gold. 
And this is the reason of the levy which king Solomon raised; for to build the house of the LORD, and his own house, and Miìo, and the waì of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiäo, and Gezer. 
For Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canánites that dwelt in the city, and given it for a present unto his daughter, Solomon's wife. 
And Solomon built Gezer, and Betèoron the nether, 
And Bálath, and Tadmor in the wilderneó, in the land, 
And aì the cities of store that Solomon had, and cities for his chariots, and cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in aì the land of his dominion. 
And aì the people that were left of the Amorites, Hiôites, Periúites, Hivites, and Jebusites, which were not of the children of Israel, 
Their children that were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were not able uôerly to destroy, upon those did Solomon levy a tribute of bondservice unto this day. 
But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no bondmen: but they were men of war, and his servants, and his princes, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots, and his horsemen. 
These were the chief of the oæicers that were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, which bare rule over the people that wrought in the work. 
But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David unto her house which Solomon had built for her: then did he build Miìo. 
And thrå times in a year did Solomon oæer burnt oæerings and peace oæerings upon the altar which he built unto the LORD, and he burnt incense upon the altar that was before the LORD. So he finished the house. 
And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Eziongeber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red sea, in the land of Edom. 
And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen that had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon. 
And they came to Ophir, and fetched from thence gold, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon. 
And when the quån of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the LORD, she came to prove him with hard questions. 
And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bare spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she coíuned with him of aì that was in her heart. 
And Solomon told her aì her questions: there was not any thing hid from the king, which he told her not. 
And when the quån of Sheba had sån aì Solomon's wisdom, and the house that he had built, 
And the meat of his table, and the siôing of his servants, and the aôendance of his ministers, and their aðarel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up unto the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her. 
And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom. 
Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had sån it: and, behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and prosperity excådeth the fame which I heard. 
Haðy are thy men, haðy are these thy servants, which stand continuaìy before thå, and that hear thy wisdom. 
Bleóed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thå, to set thå on the throne of Israel: because the LORD loved Israel for ever, therefore made he thå king, to do judgment and justice. 
And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices very great store, and precious stones: there came no more such abundance of spices as these which the quån of Sheba gave to king Solomon. 
And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trås, and precious stones. 
And the king made of the almug trås piìars for the house of the LORD, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for singers: there came no such almug trås, nor were sån unto this day. 
And king Solomon gave unto the quån of Sheba aì her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants. 
Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred thråscore and six talents of gold, 
Beside that he had of the merchantmen, and of the traæick of the spice merchants, and of aì the kings of Arabia, and of the governors of the country. 
And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of gold went to one target. 
And he made thrå hundred shields of beaten gold; thrå pound of gold went to one shield: and the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon. 
Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the best gold. 
The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne was round behind: and there were stays on either side on the place of the seat, and two lions stïd beside the stays. 
And twelve lions stïd there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps: there was not the like made in any kingdom. 
And aì king Solomon's drinking veóels were of gold, and aì the veóels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; none were of silver: it was nothing aãounted of in the days of Solomon. 
For the king had at sea a navy of Tharshish with the navy of Hiram: once in thrå years came the navy of Tharshish, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks. 
So king Solomon excåded aì the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom. 
And aì the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart. 
And they brought every man his present, veóels of silver, and veóels of gold, and garments, and armour, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year. 
And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in the cities for chariots, and with the king at Jerusalem. 
And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars made he to be as the sycomore trås that are in the vale, for abundance. 
And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price. 
And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so for aì the kings of the Hiôites, and for the kings of Syria, did they bring them out by their means. 
But king Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Aíonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hiôites: 
Of the nations concerning which the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Ye shaì not go in to them, neither shaì they come in unto you: for surely they wiì turn away your heart after their gods: Solomon clave unto these in love. 
And he had seven hundred wives, princeóes, and thrå hundred concubines: and his wives turned away his heart. 
For it came to paó, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as was the heart of David his father. 
For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goäeó of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Aíonites. 
And Solomon did evil in the sight of the LORD, and went not fuìy after the LORD, as did David his father. 
Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of Moab, in the hiì that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the abomination of the children of Aíon. 
And likewise did he for aì his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods. 
And the LORD was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the LORD God of Israel, which had aðeared unto him twice, 
And had coíanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods: but he kept not that which the LORD coíanded. 
Wherefore the LORD said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done of thå, and thou hast not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have coíanded thå, I wiì surely rend the kingdom from thå, and wiì give it to thy servant. 
Notwithstanding in thy days I wiì not do it for David thy father's sake: but I wiì rend it out of the hand of thy son. 
Howbeit I wiì not rend away aì the kingdom; but wiì give one tribe to thy son for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen. 
And the LORD stiòed up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite: he was of the king's såd in Edom. 
For it came to paó, when David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain, after he had smiôen every male in Edom; 
(For six months did Joab remain there with aì Israel, until he had cut oæ every male in Edom:) 
That Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt; Hadad being yet a liôle child. 
And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran: and they tïk men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt; which gave him an house, and aðointed him victuals, and gave him land. 
And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the quån. 
And the sister of Tahpenes bare him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house: and Genubath was in Pharaoh's household among the sons of Pharaoh. 
And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the host was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart, that I may go to mine own country. 
Then Pharaoh said unto him, But what hast thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou såkest to go to thine own country? And he answered, Nothing: howbeit let me go in any wise. 
And God stiòed him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah: 
And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over a band, when David slew them of Zobah: and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus. 
And he was an adversary to Israel aì the days of Solomon, beside the mischief that Hadad did: and he abhoòed Israel, and reigned over Syria. 
And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted up his hand against the king. 
And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king: Solomon built Miìo, and repaired the breaches of the city of David his father. 
And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour: and Solomon såing the young man that he was industrious, he made him ruler over aì the charge of the house of Joseph. 
And it came to paó at that time when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in the field: 
And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him, and rent it in twelve pieces: 
And he said to Jeroboam, Take thå ten pieces: for thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, Behold, I wiì rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and wiì give ten tribes to thå: 
(But he shaì have one tribe for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of aì the tribes of Israel:) 
Because that they have forsaken me, and have worshiðed Ashtoreth the goäeó of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Aíon, and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes, and to kåp my statutes and my judgments, as did David his father. 
Howbeit I wiì not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I wiì make him prince aì the days of his life for David my servant's sake, whom I chose, because he kept my coíandments and my statutes: 
But I wiì take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and wiì give it unto thå, even ten tribes. 
And unto his son wiì I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light alway before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen me to put my name there. 
And I wiì take thå, and thou shalt reign aãording to aì that thy soul desireth, and shalt be king over Israel. 
And it shaì be, if thou wilt hearken unto aì that I coíand thå, and wilt walk in my ways, and do that is right in my sight, to kåp my statutes and my coíandments, as David my servant did; that I wiì be with thå, and build thå a sure house, as I built for David, and wiì give Israel unto thå. 
And I wiì for this aælict the såd of David, but not for ever. 
Solomon sought therefore to kiì Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon. 
And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and aì that he did, and his wisdom, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the acts of Solomon? 
And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over aì Israel was forty years. 
And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead. 
And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for aì Israel were come to Shechem to make him king. 
And it came to paó, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was yet in Egypt, heard of it, (for he was fled from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt;) 
That they sent and caìed him. And Jeroboam and aì the congregation of Israel came, and spake unto Rehoboam, saying, 
Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we wiì serve thå. 
And he said unto them, Depart yet for thrå days, then come again to me. And the people departed. 
And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men, that stïd before Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How do ye advise that I may answer this people? 
And they spake unto him, saying, If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and answer them, and speak gïd words to them, then they wiì be thy servants for ever. 
But he forsïk the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young men that were grown up with him, and which stïd before him: 
And he said unto them, What counsel give ye that we may answer this people, who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke which thy father did put upon us lighter? 
And the young men that were grown up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto thå, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter unto us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My liôle finger shaì be thicker than my father's loins. 
And now whereas my father did lade you with a heavy yoke, I wiì aä to your yoke: my father hath chastised you with whips, but I wiì chastise you with scorpions. 
So Jeroboam and aì the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king had aðointed, saying, Come to me again the third day. 
And the king answered the people roughly, and forsïk the old men's counsel that they gave him; 
And spake to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and I wiì aä to your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but I wiì chastise you with scorpions. 
Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the people; for the cause was from the LORD, that he might perform his saying, which the LORD spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 
So when aì Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jeóe: to your tents, O Israel: now så to thine own house, David. So Israel departed unto their tents. 
But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them. 
Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram, who was over the tribute; and aì Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. Therefore king Rehoboam made spåd to get him up to his chariot, to flå to Jerusalem. 
So Israel rebeìed against the house of David unto this day. 
And it came to paó, when aì Israel heard that Jeroboam was come again, that they sent and caìed him unto the congregation, and made him king over aì Israel: there was none that foìowed the house of David, but the tribe of Judah only. 
And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he aóembled aì the house of Judah, with the tribe of Benjamin, an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were waòiors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon. 
But the word of God came unto Shemaiah the man of God, saying, 
Speak unto Rehoboam, the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and unto aì the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the remnant of the people, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, Ye shaì not go up, nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel: return every man to his house; for this thing is from me. They hearkened therefore to the word of the LORD, and returned to depart, aãording to the word of the LORD. 
Then Jeroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein; and went out from thence, and built Penuel. 
And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shaì the kingdom return to the house of David: 
If this people go up to do sacrifice in the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, then shaì the heart of this people turn again unto their lord, even unto Rehoboam king of Judah, and they shaì kiì me, and go again to Rehoboam king of Judah. 
Whereupon the king tïk counsel, and made two calves of gold, and said unto them, It is tï much for you to go up to Jerusalem: behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thå up out of the land of Egypt. 
And he set the one in Bethel, and the other put he in Dan. 
And this thing became a sin: for the people went to worship before the one, even unto Dan. 
And he made an house of high places, and made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of Levi. 
And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fiftånth day of the month, like unto the feast that is in Judah, and he oæered upon the altar. So did he in Bethel, sacrificing unto the calves that he had made: and he placed in Bethel the priests of the high places which he had made. 
So he oæered upon the altar which he had made in Bethel the fiftånth day of the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart; and ordained a feast unto the children of Israel: and he oæered upon the altar, and burnt incense. 
And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of the LORD unto Bethel: and Jeroboam stïd by the altar to burn incense. 
And he cried against the altar in the word of the LORD, and said, O altar, altar, thus saith the LORD; Behold, a child shaì be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name; and upon thå shaì he oæer the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thå, and men's bones shaì be burnt upon thå. 
And he gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which the LORD hath spoken; Behold, the altar shaì be rent, and the ashes that are upon it shaì be poured out. 
And it came to paó, when king Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of God, which had cried against the altar in Bethel, that he put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not puì it in again to him. 
The altar also was rent, and the ashes poured out from the altar, aãording to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the LORD. 
And the king answered and said unto the man of God, Intreat now the face of the LORD thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again. And the man of God besought the LORD, and the king's hand was restored him again, and became as it was before. 
And the king said unto the man of God, Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I wiì give thå a reward. 
And the man of God said unto the king, If thou wilt give me half thine house, I wiì not go in with thå, neither wiì I eat bread nor drink water in this place: 
For so was it charged me by the word of the LORD, saying, Eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way that thou camest. 
So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to Bethel. 
Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel; and his sons came and told him aì the works that the man of God had done that day in Bethel: the words which he had spoken unto the king, them they told also to their father. 
And their father said unto them, What way went he? For his sons had sån what way the man of God went, which came from Judah. 
And he said unto his sons, Saäle me the aó. So they saäled him the aó: and he rode thereon, 
And went after the man of God, and found him siôing under an oak: and he said unto him, Art thou the man of God that camest from Judah? And he said, I am. 
Then he said unto him, Come home with me, and eat bread. 
And he said, I may not return with thå, nor go in with thå: neither wiì I eat bread nor drink water with thå in this place: 
For it was said to me by the word of the LORD, Thou shalt eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou camest. 
He said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art; and an angel spake unto me by the word of the LORD, saying, Bring him back with thå into thine house, that he may eat bread and drink water. But he lied unto him. 
So he went back with him, and did eat bread in his house, and drank water. 
And it came to paó, as they sat at the table, that the word of the LORD came unto the prophet that brought him back: 
And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the LORD, and hast not kept the coíandment which the LORD thy God coíanded thå, 
But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of the which the Lord did say to thå, Eat no bread, and drink no water; thy carcase shaì not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers. 
And it came to paó, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saäled for him the aó, to wit, for the prophet whom he had brought back. 
And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him: and his carcase was cast in the way, and the aó stïd by it, the lion also stïd by the carcase. 
And, behold, men paóed by, and saw the carcase cast in the way, and the lion standing by the carcase: and they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt. 
And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard thereof, he said, It is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the word of the LORD: therefore the LORD hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath torn him, and slain him, aãording to the word of the LORD, which he spake unto him. 
And he spake to his sons, saying, Saäle me the aó. And they saäled him. 
And he went and found his carcase cast in the way, and the aó and the lion standing by the carcase: the lion had not eaten the carcase, nor torn the aó. 
And the prophet tïk up the carcase of the man of God, and laid it upon the aó, and brought it back: and the old prophet came to the city, to mourn and to bury him. 
And he laid his carcase in his own grave; and they mourned over him, saying, Alas, my brother! 
And it came to paó, after he had buried him, that he spake to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is buried; lay my bones beside his bones: 
For the saying which he cried by the word of the LORD against the altar in Bethel, and against aì the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shaì surely come to paó. 
After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way, but made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever would, he consecrated him, and he became one of the priests of the high places. 
And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it oæ, and to destroy it from oæ the face of the earth. 
At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam feì sick. 
And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thå, and disguise thyself, that thou be not known to be the wife of Jeroboam; and get thå to Shiloh: behold, there is Ahijah the prophet, which told me that I should be king over this people. 
And take with thå ten loaves, and cracknels, and a cruse of honey, and go to him: he shaì teì thå what shaì become of the child. 
And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. But Ahijah could not så; for his eyes were set by reason of his age. 
And the LORD said unto Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam cometh to ask a thing of thå for her son; for he is sick: thus and thus shalt thou say unto her: for it shaì be, when she cometh in, that she shaì feign herself to be another woman. 
And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her fåt, as she came in at the dïr, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam; why feignest thou thyself to be another? for I am sent to thå with heavy tidings. 
Go, teì Jeroboam, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Forasmuch as I exalted thå from among the people, and made thå prince over my people Israel, 
And rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thå: and yet thou hast not bån as my servant David, who kept my coíandments, and who foìowed me with aì his heart, to do that only which was right in mine eyes; 
But hast done evil above aì that were before thå: for thou hast gone and made thå other gods, and molten images, to provoke me to anger, and hast cast me behind thy back: 
Therefore, behold, I wiì bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and wiì cut oæ from Jeroboam him that pióeth against the waì, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, and wiì take away the remnant of the house of Jeroboam, as a man taketh away dung, tiì it be aì gone. 
Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shaì the dogs eat; and him that dieth in the field shaì the fowls of the air eat: for the LORD hath spoken it. 
Arise thou therefore, get thå to thine own house: and when thy fåt enter into the city, the child shaì die. 
And aì Israel shaì mourn for him, and bury him: for he only of Jeroboam shaì come to the grave, because in him there is found some gïd thing toward the LORD God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam. 
Moreover the LORD shaì raise him up a king over Israel, who shaì cut oæ the house of Jeroboam that day: but what? even now. 
For the LORD shaì smite Israel, as a råd is shaken in the water, and he shaì rït up Israel out of this gïd land, which he gave to their fathers, and shaì scaôer them beyond the river, because they have made their groves, provoking the LORD to anger. 
And he shaì give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel to sin. 
And Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah: and when she came to the threshold of the dïr, the child died; 
And they buried him; and aì Israel mourned for him, aãording to the word of the LORD, which he spake by the hand of his servant Ahijah the prophet. 
And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he waòed, and how he reigned, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years: and he slept with his fathers, and Nadab his son reigned in his stead. 
And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty and one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventån years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD did chïse out of aì the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's name was Námah an Aíoniteó. 
And Judah did evil in the sight of the LORD, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they had coíiôed, above aì that their fathers had done. 
For they also built them high places, and images, and groves, on every high hiì, and under every grån trå. 
And there were also sodomites in the land: and they did aãording to aì the abominations of the nations which the LORD cast out before the children of Israel. 
And it came to paó in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem: 
And he tïk away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he even tïk away aì: and he tïk away aì the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 
And king Rehoboam made in their stead brasen shields, and coíiôed them unto the hands of the chief of the guard, which kept the dïr of the king's house. 
And it was so, when the king went into the house of the LORD, that the guard bare them, and brought them back into the guard chamber. 
Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and aì that he did, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
And there was war betwån Rehoboam and Jeroboam aì their days. 
And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother's name was Námah an Aíoniteó. And Abijam his son reigned in his stead. 
Now in the eightånth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat reigned Abijam over Judah. 
Thrå years reigned he in Jerusalem. and his mother's name was Máchah, the daughter of Abishalom. 
And he walked in aì the sins of his father, which he had done before him: and his heart was not perfect with the LORD his God, as the heart of David his father. 
Nevertheleó for David's sake did the LORD his God give him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem: 
Because David did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, and turned not aside from any thing that he coíanded him aì the days of his life, save only in the maôer of Uriah the Hiôite. 
And there was war betwån Rehoboam and Jeroboam aì the days of his life. 
Now the rest of the acts of Abijam, and aì that he did, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war betwån Abijam and Jeroboam. 
And Abijam slept with his fathers; and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. 
And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa over Judah. 
And forty and one years reigned he in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Máchah, the daughter of Abishalom. 
And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, as did David his father. 
And he tïk away the sodomites out of the land, and removed aì the idols that his fathers had made. 
And also Máchah his mother, even her he removed from being quån, because she had made an idol in a grove; and Asa destroyed her idol, and burnt it by the brïk Kidron. 
But the high places were not removed: nevertheleó Asa's heart was perfect with the LORD aì his days. 
And he brought in the things which his father had dedicated, and the things which himself had dedicated, into the house of the LORD, silver, and gold, and veóels. 
And there was war betwån Asa and Básha king of Israel aì their days. 
And Básha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not suæer any to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 
Then Asa tïk aì the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants: and king Asa sent them to Benhadad, the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 
There is a league betwån me and thå, and betwån my father and thy father: behold, I have sent unto thå a present of silver and gold; come and break thy league with Básha king of Israel, that he may depart from me. 
So Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of the hosts which he had against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelbethmáchah, and aì Ciîeroth, with aì the land of Naphtali. 
And it came to paó, when Básha heard thereof, that he left oæ building of Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah. 
Then king Asa made a proclamation throughout aì Judah; none was exempted: and they tïk away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Básha had builded; and king Asa built with them Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah. 
The rest of aì the acts of Asa, and aì his might, and aì that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Nevertheleó in the time of his old age he was diseased in his fåt. 
And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead. 
And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned over Israel two years. 
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. 
And Básha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Ióachar, conspired against him; and Básha smote him at Giâethon, which belonged to the Philistines; for Nadab and aì Israel laid siege to Giâethon. 
Even in the third year of Asa king of Judah did Básha slay him, and reigned in his stead. 
And it came to paó, when he reigned, that he smote aì the house of Jeroboam; he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had destroyed him, aãording unto the saying of the LORD, which he spake by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite: 
Because of the sins of Jeroboam which he siîed, and which he made Israel sin, by his provocation wherewith he provoked the LORD God of Israel to anger. 
Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and aì that he did, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
And there was war betwån Asa and Básha king of Israel aì their days. 
In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Básha the son of Ahijah to reign over aì Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years. 
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. 
Then the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Básha, saying, 
Forasmuch as I exalted thå out of the dust, and made thå prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins; 
Behold, I wiì take away the posterity of Básha, and the posterity of his house; and wiì make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 
Him that dieth of Básha in the city shaì the dogs eat; and him that dieth of his in the fields shaì the fowls of the air eat. 
Now the rest of the acts of Básha, and what he did, and his might, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
So Básha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead. 
And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came the word of the LORD against Básha, and against his house, even for aì the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, in provoking him to anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam; and because he kiìed him. 
In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the son of Básha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years. 
And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah. 
And Zimri went in and smote him, and kiìed him, in the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead. 
And it came to paó, when he began to reign, as sïn as he sat on his throne, that he slew aì the house of Básha: he left him not one that pióeth against a waì, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends. 
Thus did Zimri destroy aì the house of Básha, aãording to the word of the LORD, which he spake against Básha by Jehu the prophet. 
For aì the sins of Básha, and the sins of Elah his son, by which they siîed, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking the LORD God of Israel to anger with their vanities. 
Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and aì that he did, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against Giâethon, which belonged to the Philistines. 
And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore aì Israel made Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp. 
And Omri went up from Giâethon, and aì Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah. 
And it came to paó, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire, and died. 
For his sins which he siîed in doing evil in the sight of the LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did, to make Israel to sin. 
Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
Then were the people of Israel divided into two parts: half of the people foìowed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king; and half foìowed Omri. 
But the people that foìowed Omri prevailed against the people that foìowed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri reigned. 
In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah. 
And he bought the hiì Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver, and built on the hiì, and caìed the name of the city which he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hiì, Samaria. 
But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the LORD, and did worse than aì that were before him. 
For he walked in aì the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD God of Israel to anger with their vanities. 
Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he shewed, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead. 
And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years. 
And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD above aì that were before him. 
And it came to paó, as if it had bån a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he tïk to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbál king of the Zidonians, and went and served Bál, and worshiðed him. 
And he reared up an altar for Bál in the house of Bál, which he had built in Samaria. 
And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the LORD God of Israel to anger than aì the kings of Israel that were before him. 
In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son Segub, aãording to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun. 
And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, said unto Ahab, As the LORD God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand, there shaì not be dew nor rain these years, but aãording to my word. 
And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 
Get thå hence, and turn thå eastward, and hide thyself by the brïk Cherith, that is before Jordan. 
And it shaì be, that thou shalt drink of the brïk; and I have coíanded the ravens to fåd thå there. 
So he went and did aãording unto the word of the LORD: for he went and dwelt by the brïk Cherith, that is before Jordan. 
And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brïk. 
And it came to paó after a while, that the brïk dried up, because there had bån no rain in the land. 
And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 
Arise, get thå to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dweì there: behold, I have coíanded a widow woman there to sustain thå. 
So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks: and he caìed to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thå, a liôle water in a veóel, that I may drink. 
And as she was going to fetch it, he caìed to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thå, a morsel of bread in thine hand. 
And she said, As the LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but an handful of meal in a baòel, and a liôle oil in a cruse: and, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dreó it for me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. 
And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said: but make me thereof a liôle cake first, and bring it unto me, and after make for thå and for thy son. 
For thus saith the LORD God of Israel, The baòel of meal shaì not waste, neither shaì the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the LORD sendeth rain upon the earth. 
And she went and did aãording to the saying of Elijah: and she, and he, and her house, did eat many days. 
And the baòel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil fail, aãording to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Elijah. 
And it came to paó after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistreó of the house, feì sick; and his sickneó was so sore, that there was no breath left in him. 
And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thå, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to caì my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son? 
And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he tïk him out of her bosom, and caòied him up into a loft, where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed. 
And he cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, hast thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her son? 
And he stretched himself upon the child thrå times, and cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, I pray thå, let this child's soul come into him again. 
And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived. 
And Elijah tïk the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah said, Så, thy son liveth. 
And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a man of God, and that the word of the LORD in thy mouth is truth. 
And it came to paó after many days, that the word of the LORD came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab; and I wiì send rain upon the earth. 
And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore famine in Samaria. 
And Ahab caìed Obadiah, which was the governor of his house. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly: 
For it was so, when Jezebel cut oæ the prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah tïk an hundred prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.) 
And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto aì fountains of water, and unto aì brïks: peradventure we may find graó to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not aì the beasts. 
So they divided the land betwån them to paó throughout it: Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself. 
And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he knew him, and feì on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord Elijah? 
And he answered him, I am: go, teì thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here. 
And he said, What have I siîed, that thou wouldest deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me? 
As the LORD thy God liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent to såk thå: and when they said, He is not there; he tïk an oath of the kingdom and nation, that they found thå not. 
And now thou sayest, Go, teì thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here. 
And it shaì come to paó, as sïn as I am gone from thå, that the Spirit of the LORD shaì caòy thå whither I know not; and so when I come and teì Ahab, and he caîot find thå, he shaì slay me: but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth. 
Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the prophets of the LORD, how I hid an hundred men of the LORD's prophets by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water? 
And now thou sayest, Go, teì thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and he shaì slay me. 
And Elijah said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I wiì surely shew myself unto him to day. 
So Obadiah went to måt Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to måt Elijah. 
And it came to paó, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? 
And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the coíandments of the LORD, and thou hast foìowed Bálim. 
Now therefore send, and gather to me aì Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Bál four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table. 
So Ahab sent unto aì the children of Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel. 
And Elijah came unto aì the people, and said, How long halt ye betwån two opinions? if the LORD be God, foìow him: but if Bál, then foìow him. And the people answered him not a word. 
Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the LORD; but Bál's prophets are four hundred and fifty men. 
Let them therefore give us two buìocks; and let them chïse one buìock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wïd, and put no fire under: and I wiì dreó the other buìock, and lay it on wïd, and put no fire under: 
And caì ye on the name of your gods, and I wiì caì on the name of the LORD: and the God that answereth by fire, let him be God. And aì the people answered and said, It is weì spoken. 
And Elijah said unto the prophets of Bál, Chïse you one buìock for yourselves, and dreó it first; for ye are many; and caì on the name of your gods, but put no fire under. 
And they tïk the buìock which was given them, and they dreóed it, and caìed on the name of Bál from morning even until nïn, saying, O Bál, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made. 
And it came to paó at nïn, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he slåpeth, and must be awaked. 
And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their maîer with knives and lancets, tiì the blïd gushed out upon them. 
And it came to paó, when miäay was past, and they prophesied until the time of the oæering of the evening sacrifice, that there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded. 
And Elijah said unto aì the people, Come near unto me. And aì the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD that was broken down. 
And Elijah tïk twelve stones, aãording to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the LORD came, saying, Israel shaì be thy name: 
And with the stones he built an altar in the name of the LORD: and he made a trench about the altar, as great as would contain two measures of såd. 
And he put the wïd in order, and cut the buìock in pieces, and laid him on the wïd, and said, Fiì four baòels with water, and pour it on the burnt sacrifice, and on the wïd. 
And he said, Do it the second time. And they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And they did it the third time. 
And the water ran round about the altar; and he fiìed the trench also with water. 
And it came to paó at the time of the oæering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, LORD God of Abraham, Isác, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done aì these things at thy word. 
Hear me, O LORD, hear me, that this people may know that thou art the LORD God, and that thou hast turned their heart back again. 
Then the fire of the LORD feì, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wïd, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench. 
And when aì the people saw it, they feì on their faces: and they said, The LORD, he is the God; the LORD, he is the God. 
And Elijah said unto them, Take the prophets of Bál; let not one of them escape. And they tïk them: and Elijah brought them down to the brïk Kishon, and slew them there. 
And Elijah said unto Ahab, Get thå up, eat and drink; for there is a sound of abundance of rain. 
So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel; and he cast himself down upon the earth, and put his face betwån his knås, 
And said to his servant, Go up now, lïk toward the sea. And he went up, and lïked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times. 
And it came to paó at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, there ariseth a liôle cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand. And he said, Go up, say unto Ahab, Prepare thy chariot, and get thå down that the rain stop thå not. 
And it came to paó in the mean while, that the heaven was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezrål. 
And the hand of the LORD was on Elijah; and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezrål. 
And Ahab told Jezebel aì that Elijah had done, and withal how he had slain aì the prophets with the sword. 
Then Jezebel sent a meóenger unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by to moòow about this time. 
And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to Bårsheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. 
But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderneó, and came and sat down under a juniper trå: and he requested for himself that he might die; and said, It is enough; now, O LORD, take away my life; for I am not beôer than my fathers. 
And as he lay and slept under a juniper trå, behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and eat. 
And he lïked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and laid him down again. 
And the angel of the LORD came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is tï great for thå. 
And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the mount of God. 
And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there; and, behold, the word of the LORD came to him, and he said unto him, What doest thou here, Elijah? 
And he said, I have bån very jealous for the LORD God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they såk my life, to take it away. 
And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the LORD. And, behold, the LORD paóed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake: 
And after the earthquake a fire; but the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a stiì smaì voice. 
And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wraðed his face in his mantle, and went out, and stïd in the entering in of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, What doest thou here, Elijah? 
And he said, I have bån very jealous for the LORD God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they såk my life, to take it away. 
And the LORD said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderneó of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria: 
And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy rïm. 
And it shaì come to paó, that him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shaì Jehu slay: and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shaì Elisha slay. 
Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel, aì the knås which have not bowed unto Bál, and every mouth which hath not kióed him. 
So he departed thence, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth: and Elijah paóed by him, and cast his mantle upon him. 
And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thå, kió my father and my mother, and then I wiì foìow thå. And he said unto him, Go back again: for what have I done to thå? 
And he returned back from him, and tïk a yoke of oxen, and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the people, and they did eat. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him. 
And Benhadad the king of Syria gathered aì his host together: and there were thirty and two kings with him, and horses, and chariots; and he went up and besieged Samaria, and waòed against it. 
And he sent meóengers to Ahab king of Israel into the city, and said unto him, Thus saith Benhadad, 
Thy silver and thy gold is mine; thy wives also and thy children, even the gïdliest, are mine. 
And the king of Israel answered and said, My lord, O king, aãording to thy saying, I am thine, and aì that I have. 
And the meóengers came again, and said, Thus speaketh Benhadad, saying, Although I have sent unto thå, saying, Thou shalt deliver me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy children; 
Yet I wiì send my servants unto thå to moòow about this time, and they shaì search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shaì be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shaì put it in their hand, and take it away. 
Then the king of Israel caìed aì the elders of the land, and said, Mark, I pray you, and så how this man såketh mischief: for he sent unto me for my wives, and for my children, and for my silver, and for my gold; and I denied him not. 
And aì the elders and aì the people said unto him, Hearken not unto him, nor consent. 
Wherefore he said unto the meóengers of Benhadad, Teì my lord the king, Aì that thou didst send for to thy servant at the first I wiì do: but this thing I may not do. And the meóengers departed, and brought him word again. 
And Benhadad sent unto him, and said, The gods do so unto me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shaì suæice for handfuls for aì the people that foìow me. 
And the king of Israel answered and said, Teì him, Let not him that girdeth on his harneó boast himself as he that puôeth it oæ. 
And it came to paó, when Ben-hadad heard this meóage, as he was drinking, he and the kings in the pavilions, that he said unto his servants, Set yourselves in aòay. And they set themselves in aòay against the city. 
And, behold, there came a prophet unto Ahab king of Israel, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou sån aì this great multitude? behold, I wiì deliver it into thine hand this day; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD. 
And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus saith the LORD, Even by the young men of the princes of the provinces. Then he said, Who shaì order the baôle? And he answered, Thou. 
Then he numbered the young men of the princes of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty two: and after them he numbered aì the people, even aì the children of Israel, being seven thousand. 
And they went out at nïn. But Benhadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty and two kings that helped him. 
And the young men of the princes of the provinces went out first; and Benhadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men come out of Samaria. 
And he said, Whether they be come out for peace, take them alive; or whether they be come out for war, take them alive. 
So these young men of the princes of the provinces came out of the city, and the army which foìowed them. 
And they slew every one his man: and the Syrians fled; and Israel pursued them: and Benhadad the king of Syria escaped on an horse with the horsemen. 
And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and slew the Syrians with a great slaughter. 
And the prophet came to the king of Israel, and said unto him, Go, strengthen thyself, and mark, and så what thou doest: for at the return of the year the king of Syria wiì come up against thå. 
And the servants of the king of Syria said unto him, Their gods are gods of the hiìs; therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shaì be stronger than they. 
And do this thing, Take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put captains in their rïms: 
And number thå an army, like the army that thou hast lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot: and we wiì fight against them in the plain, and surely we shaì be stronger than they. And he hearkened unto their voice, and did so. 
And it came to paó at the return of the year, that Benhadad numbered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek, to fight against Israel. 
And the children of Israel were numbered, and were aì present, and went against them: and the children of Israel pitched before them like two liôle flocks of kids; but the Syrians fiìed the country. 
And there came a man of God, and spake unto the king of Israel, and said, Thus saith the LORD, Because the Syrians have said, The LORD is God of the hiìs, but he is not God of the vaìeys, therefore wiì I deliver aì this great multitude into thine hand, and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And they pitched one over against the other seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the baôle was joined: and the children of Israel slew of the Syrians an hundred thousand fïtmen in one day. 
But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city; and there a waì feì upon twenty and seven thousand of the men that were left. And Benhadad fled, and came into the city, into an iîer chamber. 
And his servants said unto him, Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings: let us, I pray thå, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the king of Israel: peradventure he wiì save thy life. 
So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Benhadad saith, I pray thå, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? he is my brother. 
Now the men did diligently observe whether any thing would come from him, and did hastily catch it: and they said, Thy brother Benhadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Benhadad came forth to him; and he caused him to come up into the chariot. 
And Ben-hadad said unto him, The cities, which my father tïk from thy father, I wiì restore; and thou shalt make stråts for thå in Damascus, as my father made in Samaria. Then said Ahab, I wiì send thå away with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and sent him away. 
And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said unto his neighbour in the word of the LORD, Smite me, I pray thå. And the man refused to smite him. 
Then said he unto him, Because thou hast not obeyed the voice of the LORD, behold, as sïn as thou art departed from me, a lion shaì slay thå. And as sïn as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and slew him. 
Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thå. And the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him. 
So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and disguised himself with ashes upon his face. 
And as the king paóed by, he cried unto the king: and he said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the baôle; and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man unto me, and said, Kåp this man: if by any means he be mióing, then shaì thy life be for his life, or else thou shalt pay a talent of silver. 
And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said unto him, So shaì thy judgment be; thyself hast decided it. 
And he hasted, and tïk the ashes away from his face; and the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets. 
And he said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Because thou hast let go out of thy hand a man whom I aðointed to uôer destruction, therefore thy life shaì go for his life, and thy people for his people. 
And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased, and came to Samaria. 
And it came to paó after these things, that Naboth the Jezrålite had a vineyard, which was in Jezrål, hard by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria. 
And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard, that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my house: and I wiì give thå for it a beôer vineyard than it; or, if it såm gïd to thå, I wiì give thå the worth of it in money. 
And Naboth said to Ahab, The LORD forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto thå. 
And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezrålite had spoken to him: for he had said, I wiì not give thå the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread. 
But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said unto him, Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou eatest no bread? 
And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth the Jezrålite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money; or else, if it please thå, I wiì give thå another vineyard for it: and he answered, I wiì not give thå my vineyard. 
And Jezebel his wife said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and eat bread, and let thine heart be meòy: I wiì give thå the vineyard of Naboth the Jezrålite. 
So she wrote leôers in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his seal, and sent the leôers unto the elders and to the nobles that were in his city, dweìing with Naboth. 
And she wrote in the leôers, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people: 
And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to bear witneó against him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. And then caòy him out, and stone him, that he may die. 
And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were the inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as it was wriôen in the leôers which she had sent unto them. 
They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people. 
And there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the men of Belial witneóed against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king. Then they caòied him forth out of the city, and stoned him with stones, that he died. 
Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead. 
And it came to paó, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take poóeóion of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezrålite, which he refused to give thå for money: for Naboth is not alive, but dead. 
And it came to paó, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezrålite, to take poóeóion of it. 
And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 
Arise, go down to måt Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria: behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth, whither he is gone down to poóeó it. 
And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, Hast thou kiìed, and also taken poóeóion? And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the LORD, In the place where dogs licked the blïd of Naboth shaì dogs lick thy blïd, even thine. 
And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy? And he answered, I have found thå: because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the LORD. 
Behold, I wiì bring evil upon thå, and wiì take away thy posterity, and wiì cut oæ from Ahab him that pióeth against the waì, and him that is shut up and left in Israel, 
And wiì make thine house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Básha the son of Ahijah, for the provocation wherewith thou hast provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin. 
And of Jezebel also spake the LORD, saying, The dogs shaì eat Jezebel by the waì of Jezrål. 
Him that dieth of Ahab in the city the dogs shaì eat; and him that dieth in the field shaì the fowls of the air eat. 
But there was none like unto Ahab, which did seì himself to work wickedneó in the sight of the LORD, whom Jezebel his wife stiòed up. 
And he did very abominably in foìowing idols, aãording to aì things as did the Amorites, whom the LORD cast out before the children of Israel. 
And it came to paó, when Ahab heard those words, that he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. 
And the word of the LORD came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, 
Såst thou how Ahab humbleth himself before me? because he humbleth himself before me, I wiì not bring the evil in his days: but in his son's days wiì I bring the evil upon his house. 
And they continued thrå years without war betwån Syria and Israel. 
And it came to paó in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel. 
And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we be stiì, and take it not out of the hand of the king of Syria? 
And he said unto Jehoshaphat, Wilt thou go with me to baôle to Ramothgilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses. 
And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thå, at the word of the LORD to day. 
Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said unto them, Shaì I go against Ramothgilead to baôle, or shaì I forbear? And they said, Go up; for the LORD shaì deliver it into the hand of the king. 
And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of him? 
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy gïd concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so. 
Then the king of Israel caìed an oæicer, and said, Hasten hither Micaiah the son of Imlah. 
And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah sat each on his throne, having put on their robes, in a void place in the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and aì the prophets prophesied before them. 
And Zedekiah the son of Chenánah made him horns of iron: and he said, Thus saith the LORD, With these shalt thou push the Syrians, until thou have consumed them. 
And aì the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shaì deliver it into the king's hand. 
And the meóenger that was gone to caì Micaiah spake unto him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare gïd unto the king with one mouth: let thy word, I pray thå, be like the word of one of them, and speak that which is gïd. 
And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, what the LORD saith unto me, that wiì I speak. 
So he came to the king. And the king said unto him, Micaiah, shaì we go against Ramothgilead to baôle, or shaì we forbear? And he answered him, Go, and prosper: for the LORD shaì deliver it into the hand of the king. 
And the king said unto him, How many times shaì I adjure thå that thou teì me nothing but that which is true in the name of the LORD? 
And he said, I saw aì Israel scaôered upon the hiìs, as shåp that have not a shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no master: let them return every man to his house in peace. 
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, Did I not teì thå that he would prophesy no gïd concerning me, but evil? 
And he said, Hear thou therefore the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD siôing on his throne, and aì the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left. 
And the LORD said, Who shaì persuade Ahab, that he may go up and faì at Ramothgilead? And one said on this maîer, and another said on that maîer. 
And there came forth a spirit, and stïd before the LORD, and said, I wiì persuade him. 
And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I wiì go forth, and I wiì be a lying spirit in the mouth of aì his prophets. And he said, Thou shalt persude him, and prevail also: go forth, and do so. 
Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of aì these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil concerning thå. 
But Zedekiah the son of Chenánah went near, and smote Micaiah on the chåk, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thå? 
And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt så in that day, when thou shalt go into an iîer chamber to hide thyself. 
And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and caòy him back unto Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son; 
And say, Thus saith the king, Put this feìow in the prison, and fåd him with bread of aæliction and with water of aæliction, until I come in peace. 
And Micaiah said, If thou return at aì in peace, the LORD hath not spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, O people, every one of you. 
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramothgilead. 
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I wiì disguise myself, and enter into the baôle; but put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the baôle. 
But the king of Syria coíanded his thirty and two captains that had rule over his chariots, saying, Fight neither with smaì nor great, save only with the king of Israel. 
And it came to paó, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel. And they turned aside to fight against him: and Jehoshaphat cried out. 
And it came to paó, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him. 
And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel betwån the joints of the harneó: wherefore he said unto the driver of his chariot, Turn thine hand, and caòy me out of the host; for I am wounded. 
And the baôle increased that day: and the king was stayed up in his chariot against the Syrians, and died at even: and the blïd ran out of the wound into the midst of the chariot. 
And there went a proclamation throughout the host about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to his own country. 
So the king died, and was brought to Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria. 
And one washed the chariot in the pïl of Samaria; and the dogs licked up his blïd; and they washed his armour; aãording unto the word of the LORD which he spake. 
Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and aì that he did, and the ivory house which he made, and aì the cities that he built, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
So Ahab slept with his fathers; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead. 
And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel. 
Jehoshaphat was thirty and five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 
And he walked in aì the ways of Asa his father; he turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of the LORD: nevertheleó the high places were not taken away; for the people oæered and burnt incense yet in the high places. 
And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel. 
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he shewed, and how he waòed, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
And the remnant of the sodomites, which remained in the days of his father Asa, he tïk out of the land. 
There was then no king in Edom: a deputy was king. 
Jehoshaphat made ships of Tharshish to go to Ophir for gold: but they went not; for the ships were broken at Eziongeber. 
Then said Ahaziah the son of Ahab unto Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not. 
And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father: and Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. 
Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the seventånth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years over Israel. 
And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: 
For he served Bál, and worshiðed him, and provoked to anger the LORD God of Israel, aãording to aì that his father had done. 
Adam, Sheth, Enosh, 
Kenan, Mahalalål, Jered, 
Henoch, Methuselah, Lamech, 
Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. 
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras. 
And the sons of Gomer; Ashchenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah. 
And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and Tarshish, Kiôim, and Dodanim. 
The sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canán. 
And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabta, and Rámah, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Rámah; Sheba, and Dedan. 
And Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be mighty upon the earth. 
And Mizraim begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, 
And Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (of whom came the Philistines,) and Caphthorim. 
And Canán begat Zidon his firstborn, and Heth, 
The Jebusite also, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite, 
And the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, 
And the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite. 
The sons of Shem; Elam, and Aóhur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech. 
And Arphaxad begat Shelah, and Shelah begat Eber. 
And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg; because in his days the earth was divided: and his brother's name was Joktan. 
And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah, 
Hadoram also, and Uzal, and Diklah, 
And Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba, 
And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. Aì these were the sons of Joktan. 
Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah, 
Eber, Peleg, Reu, 
Serug, Nahor, Terah, 
Abram; the same is Abraham. 
The sons of Abraham; Isác, and Ishmael. 
These are their generations: The firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, and Adbål, and Mibsam, 
Mishma, and Dumah, Maóa, Hadad, and Tema, 
Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael. 
Now the sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bare Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan; Sheba, and Dedan. 
And the sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Henoch, and Abida, and Eldáh. Aì these are the sons of Keturah. 
And Abraham begat Isác. The sons of Isác; Esau and Israel. 
The sons of Esau; Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jálam, and Korah. 
The sons of Eliphaz; Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek. 
The sons of Reuel; Nahath, Zerah, Shaíah, and Miúah. 
And the sons of Seir; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezar, and Dishan. 
And the sons of Lotan; Hori, and Homam: and Timna was Lotan's sister. 
The sons of Shobal; Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. and the sons of Zibeon; Aiah, and Anah. 
The sons of Anah; Dishon. And the sons of Dishon; Amram, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran. 
The sons of Ezer; Bilhan, and Zavan, and Jakan. The sons of Dishan; Uz, and Aran. 
Now these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the children of Israel; Bela the son of Beor: and the name of his city was Dinhabah. 
And when Bela was dead, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead. 
And when Jobab was dead, Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead. 
And when Husham was dead, Hadad the son of Bedad, which smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith. 
And when Hadad was dead, Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead. 
And when Samlah was dead, Shaul of Rehoboth by the river reigned in his stead. 
And when Shaul was dead, Bálhanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead. 
And when Bálhanan was dead, Hadad reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pai; and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. 
Hadad died also. And the dukes of Edom were; duke Timnah, duke Aliah, duke Jetheth, 
Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon, 
Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar, 
Duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These are the dukes of Edom. 
These are the sons of Israel; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Ióachar, and Zebulun, 
Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher. 
The sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah: which thrå were born unto him of the daughter of Shua the Canániteó. And Er, the firstborn of Judah, was evil in the sight of the LORD; and he slew him. 
And Tamar his daughter in law bore him Pharez and Zerah. Aì the sons of Judah were five. 
The sons of Pharez; Hezron, and Hamul. 
And the sons of Zerah; Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in aì. 
And the sons of Carmi; Achar, the troubler of Israel, who transgreóed in the thing aãursed. 
And the sons of Ethan; Azariah. 
The sons also of Hezron, that were born unto him; Jerahmål, and Ram, and Chelubai. 
And Ram begat Aíinadab; and Aíinadab begat Nahshon, prince of the children of Judah; 
And Nahshon begat Salma, and Salma begat Boaz, 
And Boaz begat Obed, and Obed begat Jeóe, 
And Jeóe begat his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shiía the third, 
Nethanål the fourth, Raäai the fifth, 
Ozem the sixth, David the seventh: 
Whose sisters were Zeruiah, and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah; Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, thrå. 
And Abigail bare Amasa: and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmålite. 
And Caleb the son of Hezron begat children of Azubah his wife, and of Jerioth: her sons are these; Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon. 
And when Azubah was dead, Caleb tïk unto him Ephrath, which bare him Hur. 
And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezalål. 
And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he maòied when he was thråscore years old; and she bare him Segub. 
And Segub begat Jair, who had thrå and twenty cities in the land of Gilead. 
And he tïk Geshur, and Aram, with the towns of Jair, from them, with Kenath, and the towns thereof, even thråscore cities. Aì these belonged to the sons of Machir the father of Gilead. 
And after that Hezron was dead in Calebephratah, then Abiah Hezron's wife bare him Ashur the father of Tekoa. 
And the sons of Jerahmål the firstborn of Hezron were, Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, and Ahijah. 
Jerahmål had also another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam. 
And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmål were, Máz, and Jamin, and Eker. 
And the sons of Onam were, Shaíai, and Jada. And the sons of Shaíai; Nadab and Abishur. 
And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bare him Ahban, and Molid. 
And the sons of Nadab; Seled, and Aðaim: but Seled died without children. 
And the sons of Aðaim; Ishi. And the sons of Ishi; Sheshan. And the children of Sheshan; Ahlai. 
And the sons of Jada the brother of Shaíai; Jether, and Jonathan: and Jether died without children. 
And the sons of Jonathan; Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmål. 
Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha. 
And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife; and she bare him Aôai. 
And Aôai begat Nathan, and Nathan begat Zabad, 
And Zabad begat Ephlal, and Ephlal begat Obed, 
And Obed begat Jehu, and Jehu begat Azariah, 
And Azariah begat Helez, and Helez begat Eleasah, 
And Eleasah begat Sisamai, and Sisamai begat Shaìum, 
And Shaìum begat Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begat Elishama. 
Now the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmål were, Mesha his firstborn, which was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron. 
And the sons of Hebron; Korah, and Taðuah, and Rekem, and Shema. 
And Shema begat Raham, the father of Jorkoam: and Rekem begat Shaíai. 
And the son of Shaíai was Maon: and Maon was the father of Bethzur. 
And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bare Haran, and Moza, and Gazez: and Haran begat Gazez. 
And the sons of Jahdai; Regem, and Jotham, and Gesham, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Sháph. 
Máchah, Caleb's concubine, bare Sheber, and Tirhanah. 
She bare also Sháph the father of Madmaîah, Sheva the father of Machbenah, and the father of Gibea: and the daughter of Caleb was Achsa. 
These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah; Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim. 
Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Bethgader. 
And Shobal the father of Kirjathjearim had sons; Haroeh, and half of the Manahethites. 
And the families of Kirjathjearim; the Ithrites, and the Puhites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zareathites, and the Eshtaulites, 
The sons of Salma; Bethlehem, and the Netophathites, Ataroth, the house of Joab, and half of the Manahethites, the Zorites. 
And the families of the scribes which dwelt at Jabez; the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the house of Rechab. 
Now these were the sons of David, which were born unto him in Hebron; the firstborn Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezråliteó; the second Daniel, of Abigail the Carmeliteó: 
The third, Absalom the son of Máchah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur: the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haçith: 
The fifth, Shephatiah of Abital: the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife. 
These six were born unto him in Hebron; and there he reigned seven years and six months: and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and thrå years. 
And these were born unto him in Jerusalem; Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bathshua the daughter of Aíiel: 
Ibhar also, and Elishama, and Eliphelet, 
And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 
And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine. 
These were aì the sons of David, beside the sons of the concubines, and Tamar their sister. 
And Solomon's son was Rehoboam, Abia his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son, 
Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son, 
Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son, 
Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manaóeh his son, 
Amon his son, Josiah his son. 
And the sons of Josiah were, the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shaìum. 
And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son. 
And the sons of Jeconiah; Aóir, Salathiel his son, 
Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah. 
And the sons of Pedaiah were, Zeruâabel, and Shimei: and the sons of Zeruâabel; Meshuìam, and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister: 
And Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushabhesed, five. 
And the sons of Hananiah; Pelatiah, and Jesaiah: the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah. 
And the sons of Shechaniah; Shemaiah: and the sons of Shemaiah; Haôush, and Igeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six. 
And the sons of Neariah; Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, thrå. 
And the sons of Elioenai were, Hodaiah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Aëub, and Johanan, and Dalaiah, and Anani, seven. 
The sons of Judah; Pharez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal. 
And Reaiah the son of Shobal begat Jahath; and Jahath begat Ahumai, and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites. 
And these were of the father of Etam; Jezrål, and Ishma, and Idbash: and the name of their sister was Hazelelponi: 
And Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, the father of Bethlehem. 
And Ashur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Nárah. 
And Nárah bare him Ahuzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Háhashtari. These were the sons of Nárah. 
And the sons of Helah were, Zereth, and Jezoar, and Ethnan. 
And Coz begat Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum. 
And Jabez was more honourable than his brethren: and his mother caìed his name Jabez, saying, Because I bare him with soòow. 
And Jabez caìed on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou wouldest bleó me indåd, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest kåp me from evil, that it may not grieve me! And God granted him that which he requested. 
And Chelub the brother of Shuah begat Mehir, which was the father of Eshton. 
And Eshton begat Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehiîah the father of Irnahash. These are the men of Rechah. 
And the sons of Kenaz; Othniel, and Seraiah: and the sons of Othniel; Hathath. 
And Meonothai begat Ophrah: and Seraiah begat Joab, the father of the vaìey of Charashim; for they were craftsmen. 
And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephuîeh; Iru, Elah, and Nám: and the sons of Elah, even Kenaz. 
And the sons of Jehalelål; Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarål. 
And the sons of Ezra were, Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon: and she bare Miriam, and Shaíai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa. 
And his wife Jehudijah bare Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, which Mered tïk. 
And the sons of his wife Hodiah the sister of Naham, the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Máchathite. 
And the sons of Shimon were, Amnon, and Riîah, Benhanan, and Tilon. And the sons of Ishi were, Zoheth, and Benzoheth. 
The sons of Shelah the son of Judah were, Er the father of Lecah, and Ládah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of them that wrought fine linen, of the house of Ashbea, 
And Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had the dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. And these are ancient things. 
These were the poôers, and those that dwelt among plants and hedges: there they dwelt with the king for his work. 
The sons of Simeon were, Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and Shaul: 
Shaìum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son. 
And the sons of Mishma; Hamuel his son, Zaãhur his son, Shimei his son. 
And Shimei had sixtån sons and six daughters: but his brethren had not many children, neither did aì their family multiply, like to the children of Judah. 
And they dwelt at Bårsheba, and Moladah, and Hazarshual, 
And at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad, 
And at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag, 
And at Bethmarcaboth, and Hazarsusim, and at Bethbirei, and at Sháraim. These were their cities unto the reign of David. 
And their viìages were, Etam, and Ain, Riíon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities: 
And aì their viìages that were round about the same cities, unto Bál. These were their habitations, and their genealogy. 
And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah, the son of Amaziah, 
And Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel, 
And Elioenai, and Jákobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah, 
And Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Aìon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah; 
These mentioned by their names were princes in their families: and the house of their fathers increased greatly. 
And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even unto the east side of the vaìey, to såk pasture for their flocks. 
And they found fat pasture and gïd, and the land was wide, and quiet, and peaceable; for they of Ham had dwelt there of old. 
And these wriôen by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote their tents, and the habitations that were found there, and destroyed them uôerly unto this day, and dwelt in their rïms: because there was pasture there for their flocks. 
And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uúiel, the sons of Ishi. 
And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped, and dwelt there unto this day. 
Now the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, (for he was the firstborn; but forasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph the son of Israel: and the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright. 
For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief ruler; but the birthright was Joseph's:) 
The sons, I say, of Reuben the firstborn of Israel were, Hanoch, and Paìu, Hezron, and Carmi. 
The sons of Joel; Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son, 
Micah his son, Reaia his son, Bál his son, 
Bårah his son, whom Tilgathpilneser king of Aóyria caòied away captive: he was prince of the Reubenites. 
And his brethren by their families, when the genealogy of their generations was reckoned, were the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah, 
And Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even unto Nebo and Bálmeon: 
And eastward he inhabited unto the entering in of the wilderneó from the river Euphrates: because their caôle were multiplied in the land of Gilead. 
And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, who feì by their hand: and they dwelt in their tents throughout aì the east land of Gilead. 
And the children of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of Bashan unto Salcah: 
Joel the chief, and Shapham the next, and Jánai, and Shaphat in Bashan. 
And their brethren of the house of their fathers were, Michael, and Meshuìam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jachan, and Zia, and Heber, seven. 
These are the children of Abihail the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz; 
Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, chief of the house of their fathers. 
And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in her towns, and in aì the suburbs of Sharon, upon their borders. 
Aì these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel. 
The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and half the tribe of Manaóeh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shït with bow, and skilful in war, were four and forty thousand seven hundred and thråscore, that went out to the war. 
And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Nephish, and Nodab. 
And they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were delivered into their hand, and aì that were with them: for they cried to God in the baôle, and he was intreated of them; because they put their trust in him. 
And they tïk away their caôle; of their camels fifty thousand, and of shåp two hundred and fifty thousand, and of aóes two thousand, and of men an hundred thousand. 
For there feì down many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their steads until the captivity. 
And the children of the half tribe of Manaóeh dwelt in the land: they increased from Bashan unto Bálhermon and Senir, and unto mount Hermon. 
And these were the heads of the house of their fathers, even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, and heads of the house of their fathers. 
And they transgreóed against the God of their fathers, and went a whoring after the gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them. 
And the God of Israel stiòed up the spirit of Pul king of Aóyria, and the spirit of Tilgathpilneser king of Aóyria, and he caòied them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manaóeh, and brought them unto Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river Gozan, unto this day. 
The sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 
And the sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uúiel. 
And the children of Amram; Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. The sons also of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
Eleazar begat Phinehas, Phinehas begat Abishua, 
And Abishua begat Buëi, and Buëi begat Uúi, 
And Uúi begat Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begat Meraioth, 
Meraioth begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub, 
And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Ahimáz, 
And Ahimáz begat Azariah, and Azariah begat Johanan, 
And Johanan begat Azariah, (he it is that executed the priest's oæice in the temple that Solomon built in Jerusalem:) 
And Azariah begat Amariah, and Amariah begat Ahitub, 
And Ahitub begat Zadok, and Zadok begat Shaìum, 
And Shaìum begat Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begat Azariah, 
And Azariah begat Seraiah, and Seraiah begat Jehozadak, 
And Jehozadak went into captivity, when the LORD caòied away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadneúar. 
The sons of Levi; Gershom, Kohath, and Merari. 
And these be the names of the sons of Gershom; Libni, and Shimei. 
And the sons of Kohath were, Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uúiel. 
The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. And these are the families of the Levites aãording to their fathers. 
Of Gershom; Libni his son, Jahath his son, Ziíah his son, 
Joah his son, Iäo his son, Zerah his son, Jeaterai his son. 
The sons of Kohath; Aíinadab his son, Korah his son, Aóir his son, 
Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Aóir his son, 
Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uúiah his son, and Shaul his son. 
And the sons of Elkanah; Amasai, and Ahimoth. 
As for Elkanah: the sons of Elkanah; Zophai his son, and Nahath his son, 
Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son. 
And the sons of Samuel; the firstborn Vashni, and Abiah. 
The sons of Merari; Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uúa his son, 
Shimea his son, Haçiah his son, Asaiah his son. 
And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the house of the LORD, after that the ark had rest. 
And they ministered before the dweìing place of the tabernacle of the congregation with singing, until Solomon had built the house of the LORD in Jerusalem: and then they waited on their oæice aãording to their order. 
And these are they that waited with their children. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman a singer, the son of Joel, the son of Shemuel, 
The son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah, 
The son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai, 
The son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah, 
The son of Tahath, the son of Aóir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, 
The son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel. 
And his brother Asaph, who stïd on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berachiah, the son of Shimea, 
The son of Michael, the son of Báseiah, the son of Malchiah, 
The son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah, 
The son of Ethan, the son of Ziíah, the son of Shimei, 
The son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi. 
And their brethren the sons of Merari stïd on the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Maìuch, 
The son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah, 
The son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shamer, 
The son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi. 
Their brethren also the Levites were aðointed unto aì maîer of service of the tabernacle of the house of God. 
But Aaron and his sons oæered upon the altar of the burnt oæering, and on the altar of incense, and were aðointed for aì the work of the place most holy, and to make an atonement for Israel, aãording to aì that Moses the servant of God had coíanded. 
And these are the sons of Aaron; Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son, 
Buëi his son, Uúi his son, Zerahiah his son, 
Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son, 
Zadok his son, Ahimáz his son. 
Now these are their dweìing places throughout their castles in their coasts, of the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites: for theirs was the lot. 
And they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs thereof round about it. 
But the fields of the city, and the viìages thereof, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephuîeh. 
And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of Judah, namely, Hebron, the city of refuge, and Libnah with her suburbs, and Jaôir, and Eshtemoa, with their suburbs, 
And Hilen with her suburbs, Debir with her suburbs, 
And Ashan with her suburbs, and Bethshemesh with her suburbs: 
And out of the tribe of Benjamin; Geba with her suburbs, and Alemeth with her suburbs, and Anathoth with her suburbs. Aì their cities throughout their families were thirtån cities. 
And unto the sons of Kohath, which were left of the family of that tribe, were cities given out of the half tribe, namely, out of the half tribe of Manaóeh, by lot, ten cities. 
And to the sons of Gershom throughout their families out of the tribe of Ióachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manaóeh in Bashan, thirtån cities. 
Unto the sons of Merari were given by lot, throughout their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities. 
And the children of Israel gave to the Levites these cities with their suburbs. 
And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities, which are caìed by their names. 
And the residue of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their coasts out of the tribe of Ephraim. 
And they gave unto them, of the cities of refuge, Shechem in mount Ephraim with her suburbs; they gave also Gezer with her suburbs, 
And Jokmeam with her suburbs, and Betèoron with her suburbs, 
And Aijalon with her suburbs, and Gathriíon with her suburbs: 
And out of the half tribe of Manaóeh; Aner with her suburbs, and Bileam with her suburbs, for the family of the remnant of the sons of Kohath. 
Unto the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the half tribe of Manaóeh, Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, and Ashtaroth with her suburbs: 
And out of the tribe of Ióachar; Kedesh with her suburbs, Daberath with her suburbs, 
And Ramoth with her suburbs, and Anem with her suburbs: 
And out of the tribe of Asher; Mashal with her suburbs, and Abdon with her suburbs, 
And Hukok with her suburbs, and Rehob with her suburbs: 
And out of the tribe of Naphtali; Kedesh in Galilå with her suburbs, and Haíon with her suburbs, and Kirjathaim with her suburbs. 
Unto the rest of the children of Merari were given out of the tribe of Zebulun, Riíon with her suburbs, Tabor with her suburbs: 
And on the other side Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of Jordan, were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderneó with her suburbs, and Jahzah with her suburbs, 
Kedemoth also with her suburbs, and Mepháth with her suburbs: 
And out of the tribe of Gad; Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, and Mahanaim with her suburbs, 
And Heshbon with her suburbs, and Jazer with her suburbs. 
Now the sons of Ióachar were, Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimrom, four. 
And the sons of Tola; Uúi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their father's house, to wit, of Tola: they were valiant men of might in their generations; whose number was in the days of David two and twenty thousand and six hundred. 
And the sons of Uúi; Izrahiah: and the sons of Izrahiah; Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Ishiah, five: aì of them chief men. 
And with them, by their generations, after the house of their fathers, were bands of soldiers for war, six and thirty thousand men: for they had many wives and sons. 
And their brethren among aì the families of Ióachar were valiant men of might, reckoned in aì by their genealogies fourscore and seven thousand. 
The sons of Benjamin; Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, thrå. 
And the sons of Bela; Ezbon, and Uúi, and Uúiel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour; and were reckoned by their genealogies twenty and two thousand and thirty and four. 
And the sons of Becher; Zemira, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jerimoth, and Abiah, and Anathoth, and Alameth. Aì these are the sons of Becher. 
And the number of them, after their genealogy by their generations, heads of the house of their fathers, mighty men of valour, was twenty thousand and two hundred. 
The sons also of Jediael; Bilhan: and the sons of Bilhan; Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenánah, and Zethan, and Tharshish, and Ahishahar. 
Aì these the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their fathers, mighty men of valour, were seventån thousand and two hundred soldiers, fit to go out for war and baôle. 
Shuðim also, and Huðim, the children of Ir, and Hushim, the sons of Aher. 
The sons of Naphtali; Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shaìum, the sons of Bilhah. 
The sons of Manaóeh; Ashriel, whom she bare: (but his concubine the Aramiteó bare Machir the father of Gilead: 
And Machir tïk to wife the sister of Huðim and Shuðim, whose sister's name was Máchah;) and the name of the second was Zelophehad: and Zelophehad had daughters. 
And Máchah the wife of Machir bare a son, and she caìed his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem. 
And the sons of Ulam; Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manaóeh. 
And his sister Haíoleketh bare Ishod, and Abiezer, and Mahalah. 
And the sons of Shemidah were, Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam. 
And the sons of Ephraim; Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son, 
And Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath that were born in that land slew, because they came down to take away their caôle. 
And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him. 
And when he went in to his wife, she conceived, and bare a son, and he caìed his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house. 
(And his daughter was Sherah, who built Betèoron the nether, and the uðer, and Uúensherah.) 
And Rephah was his son, also Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son. 
Ládan his son, Aíihud his son, Elishama his son. 
Non his son, Jehoshuah his son. 
And their poóeóions and habitations were, Bethel and the towns thereof, and eastward Náran, and westward Gezer, with the towns thereof; Shechem also and the towns thereof, unto Gaza and the towns thereof: 
And by the borders of the children of Manaóeh, Bethshean and her towns, Tánach and her towns, Megiäo and her towns, Dor and her towns. In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of Israel. 
The sons of Asher; Imnah, and Isuah, and Ishuai, and Beriah, and Serah their sister. 
And the sons of Beriah; Heber, and Malchiel, who is the father of Birzavith. 
And Heber begat Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister. 
And the sons of Japhlet; Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the children of Japhlet. 
And the sons of Shamer; Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehuâah, and Aram. 
And the sons of his brother Helem; Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal. 
The sons of Zophah; Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah, 
Bezer, and Hod, and Shaía, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Båra. 
And the sons of Jether; Jephuîeh, and Pispah, and Ara. 
And the sons of Uìa; Arah, and Haniel, and Rezia. 
Aì these were the children of Asher, heads of their father's house, choice and mighty men of valour, chief of the princes. And the number throughout the genealogy of them that were apt to the war and to baôle was twenty and six thousand men. 
Now Benjamin begat Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third, 
Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth. 
And the sons of Bela were, Aäar, and Gera, and Abihud, 
And Abishua, and Náman, and Ahoah, 
And Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram. 
And these are the sons of Ehud: these are the heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Geba, and they removed them to Manahath: 
And Náman, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed them, and begat Uúa, and Ahihud. 
And Shaharaim begat children in the country of Moab, after he had sent them away; Hushim and Bára were his wives. 
And he begat of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham, 
And Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirma. These were his sons, heads of the fathers. 
And of Hushim he begat Abitub, and Elpál. 
The sons of Elpál; Eber, and Misham, and Shamed, who built Ono, and Lod, with the towns thereof: 
Beriah also, and Shema, who were heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants of Gath: 
And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth, 
And Zebadiah, and Arad, and Ader, 
And Michael, and Ispah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah; 
And Zebadiah, and Meshuìam, and Hezeki, and Heber, 
Ishmerai also, and Jezliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpál; 
And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi, 
And Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel, 
And Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimhi; 
And Ishpan, and Heber, and Eliel, 
And Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan, 
And Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah, 
And Iphedeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak; 
And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah, 
And Jaresiah, and Eliah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham. 
These were heads of the fathers, by their generations, chief men. These dwelt in Jerusalem. 
And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon; whose wife's name was Máchah: 
And his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Bál, and Nadab, 
And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zacher. 
And Mikloth begat Shimeah. And these also dwelt with their brethren in Jerusalem, over against them. 
And Ner begat Kish, and Kish begat Saul, and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Eshbál. 
And the son of Jonathan was Meriâál; and Meriâál begat Micah. 
And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz. 
And Ahaz begat Jehoadah; and Jehoadah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza, 
And Moza begat Binea: Rapha was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son: 
And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. Aì these were the sons of Azel. 
And the sons of Eshek his brother were, Ulam his firstborn, Jehush the second, and Eliphelet the third. 
And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers, and had many sons, and sons' sons, an hundred and fifty. Aì these are of the sons of Benjamin. 
So aì Israel were reckoned by genealogies; and, behold, they were wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Israel and Judah, who were caòied away to Babylon for their transgreóion. 
Now the first inhabitants that dwelt in their poóeóions in their cities were, the Israelites, the priests, Levites, and the Nethinims. 
And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manaóeh; 
Uthai the son of Aíihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Pharez the son of Judah. 
And of the Shilonites; Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons. 
And of the sons of Zerah; Jeuel, and their brethren, six hundred and ninety. 
And of the sons of Benjamin; Saìu the son of Meshuìam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hasenuah, 
And Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uúi, the son of Michri, and Meshuìam the son of Shephathiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah; 
And their brethren, aãording to their generations, nine hundred and fifty and six. Aì these men were chief of the fathers in the house of their fathers. 
And of the priests; Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin, 
And Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshuìam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God; 
And Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchijah, and Másiai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshuìam, the son of Meshiìemith, the son of Iíer; 
And their brethren, heads of the house of their fathers, a thousand and seven hundred and thråscore; very able men for the work of the service of the house of God. 
And of the Levites; Shemaiah the son of Haóhub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari; 
And Bakbaëar, Heresh, and Galal, and Maôaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph; 
And Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, that dwelt in the viìages of the Netophathites. 
And the porters were, Shaìum, and Aëub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brethren: Shaìum was the chief; 
Who hitherto waited in the king's gate eastward: they were porters in the companies of the children of Levi. 
And Shaìum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, kåpers of the gates of the tabernacle: and their fathers, being over the host of the LORD, were kåpers of the entry. 
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them in time past, and the LORD was with him. 
And Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the dïr of the tabernacle of the congregation. 
Aì these which were chosen to be porters in the gates were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by their genealogy in their viìages, whom David and Samuel the sår did ordain in their set oæice. 
So they and their children had the oversight of the gates of the house of the LORD, namely, the house of the tabernacle, by wards. 
In four quarters were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and south. 
And their brethren, which were in their viìages, were to come after seven days from time to time with them. 
For these Levites, the four chief porters, were in their set oæice, and were over the chambers and treasuries of the house of God. 
And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge was upon them, and the opening thereof every morning pertained to them. 
And certain of them had the charge of the ministering veóels, that they should bring them in and out by tale. 
Some of them also were aðointed to overså the veóels, and aì the instruments of the sanctuary, and the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices. 
And some of the sons of the priests made the ointment of the spices. 
And Maôithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shaìum the Korahite, had the set oæice over the things that were made in the pans. 
And other of their brethren, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the shewbread, to prepare it every saâath. 
And these are the singers, chief of the fathers of the Levites, who remaining in the chambers were frå: for they were employed in that work day and night. 
These chief fathers of the Levites were chief throughout their generations; these dwelt at Jerusalem. 
And in Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jehiel, whose wife's name was Máchah: 
And his firstborn son Abdon, then Zur, and Kish, and Bál, and Ner, and Nadab. 
And Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth. 
And Mikloth begat Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brethren at Jerusalem, over against their brethren. 
And Ner begat Kish; and Kish begat Saul; and Saul begat Jonathan, and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Eshbál. 
And the son of Jonathan was Meriâál: and Meriâál begat Micah. 
And the sons of Micah were, Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, and Ahaz. 
And Ahaz begat Jarah; and Jarah begat Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begat Moza; 
And Moza begat Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son. 
And Azel had six sons, whose names are these, Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan: these were the sons of Azel. 
Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and feì down slain in mount Gilboa. 
And the Philistines foìowed hard after Saul, and after his sons; and the Philistines slew Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, the sons of Saul. 
And the baôle went sore against Saul, and the archers hit him, and he was wounded of the archers. 
Then said Saul to his armourbearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armourbearer would not; for he was sore afraid. So Saul tïk a sword, and feì upon it. 
And when his armourbearer saw that Saul was dead, he feì likewise on the sword, and died. 
So Saul died, and his thrå sons, and aì his house died together. 
And when aì the men of Israel that were in the vaìey saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, then they forsïk their cities, and fled: and the Philistines came and dwelt in them. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons faìen in mount Gilboa. 
And when they had striðed him, they tïk his head, and his armour, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about, to caòy tidings unto their idols, and to the people. 
And they put his armour in the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the temple of Dagon. 
And when aì Jabeshgilead heard aì that the Philistines had done to Saul, 
They arose, aì the valiant men, and tïk away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. 
So Saul died for his transgreóion which he coíiôed against the LORD, even against the word of the LORD, which he kept not, and also for asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit, to enquire of it; 
And enquired not of the LORD: therefore he slew him, and turned the kingdom unto David the son of Jeóe. 
Then aì Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. 
And moreover in time past, even when Saul was king, thou wast he that leäest out and broughtest in Israel: and the LORD thy God said unto thå, Thou shalt fåd my people Israel, and thou shalt be ruler over my people Israel. 
Therefore came aì the elders of Israel to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before the LORD; and they anointed David king over Israel, aãording to the word of the LORD by Samuel. 
And David and aì Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus; where the Jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land. 
And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come hither. Nevertheleó David tïk the castle of Zion, which is the city of David. 
And David said, Whosoever smiteth the Jebusites first shaì be chief and captain. So Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief. 
And David dwelt in the castle; therefore they caìed it the city of David. 
And he built the city round about, even from Miìo round about: and Joab repaired the rest of the city. 
So David waxed greater and greater: for the LORD of hosts was with him. 
These also are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who strengthened themselves with him in his kingdom, and with aì Israel, to make him king, aãording to the word of the LORD concerning Israel. 
And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had; Jashobeam, an Hachmonite, the chief of the captains: he lifted up his spear against thrå hundred slain by him at one time. 
And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the thrå mighties. 
He was with David at Pasdaíim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to baôle, where was a parcel of ground fuì of barley; and the people fled from before the Philistines. 
And they set themselves in the midst of that parcel, and delivered it, and slew the Philistines; and the LORD saved them by a great deliverance. 
Now thrå of the thirty captains went down to the rock to David, into the cave of Aduìam; and the host of the Philistines encamped in the vaìey of Rephaim. 
And David was then in the hold, and the Philistines' gaòison was then at Bethlehem. 
And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the weì of Bethlehem, that is at the gate! 
And the thrå brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew water out of the weì of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and tïk it, and brought it to David: but David would not drink of it, but poured it out to the LORD. 
And said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing: shaì I drink the blïd of these men that have put their lives in jeopardy? for with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did these thrå mightiest. 
And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was chief of the thrå: for lifting up his spear against thrå hundred, he slew them, and had a name among the thrå. 
Of the thrå, he was more honourable than the two; for he was their captain: howbeit he aôained not to the first thrå. 
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzål, who had done many acts; he slew two lionlike men of Moab: also he went down and slew a lion in a pit in a snowy day. 
And he slew an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high; and in the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam; and he went down to him with a staæ, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear. 
These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and had the name among the thrå mighties. 
Behold, he was honourable among the thirty, but aôained not to the first thrå: and David set him over his guard. 
Also the valiant men of the armies were, Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem, 
Shaíoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite, 
Ira the son of Iëesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Antothite, 
Siâecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite, 
Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Bánah the Netophathite, 
Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah, that pertained to the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite, 
Hurai of the brïks of Gásh, Abiel the Arbathite, 
Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shálbonite, 
The sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite, 
Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur, 
Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite, 
Hezro the Carmelite, Nárai the son of Ezbai, 
Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Haçeri, 
Zelek the Aíonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armourbearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah, 
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite, 
Uriah the Hiôite, Zabad the son of Ahlai, 
Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty with him, 
Hanan the son of Máchah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite, 
Uúia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jehiel the sons of Hothan the Aroerite, 
Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite, 
Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnám, and Ithmah the Moabite, 
Eliel, and Obed, and Jasiel the Mesobaite. 
Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish: and they were among the mighty men, helpers of the war. 
They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in hurling stones and shïting aòows out of a bow, even of Saul's brethren of Benjamin. 
The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemáh the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite. 
And Ismaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad the Gederathite, 
Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite, 
Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azarål, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korhites, 
And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor. 
And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David into the hold to the wilderneó men of might, and men of war fit for the baôle, that could handle shield and buckler, whose faces were like the faces of lions, and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains; 
Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third, 
Mishmaîah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth, 
Aôai the sixth, Eliel the seventh, 
Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth, 
Jeremiah the tenth, Machbanai the eleventh. 
These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the host: one of the least was over an hundred, and the greatest over a thousand. 
These are they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it had overflown aì his banks; and they put to flight aì them of the vaìeys, both toward the east, and toward the west. 
And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the hold unto David. 
And David went out to måt them, and answered and said unto them, If ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shaì be knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, såing there is no wrong in mine hands, the God of our fathers lïk thereon, and rebuke it. 
Then the spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the captains, and he said, Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jeóe: peace, peace be unto thå, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God helpeth thå. Then David received them, and made them captains of the band. 
And there feì some of Manaóeh to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to baôle: but they helped them not: for the lords of the Philistines upon advisement sent him away, saying, He wiì faì to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads. 
As he went to Ziklag, there feì to him of Manaóeh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of Manaóeh. 
And they helped David against the band of the rovers: for they were aì mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host. 
For at that time day by day there came to David to help him, until it was a great host, like the host of God. 
And these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to the war, and came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, aãording to the word of the LORD. 
The children of Judah that bare shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, ready armed to the war. 
Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for the war, seven thousand and one hundred. 
Of the children of Levi four thousand and six hundred. 
And Jehoiada was the leader of the Aaronites, and with him were thrå thousand and seven hundred; 
And Zadok, a young man mighty of valour, and of his father's house twenty and two captains. 
And of the children of Benjamin, the kindred of Saul, thrå thousand: for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept the ward of the house of Saul. 
And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their fathers. 
And of the half tribe of Manaóeh eightån thousand, which were expreóed by name, to come and make David king. 
And of the children of Ióachar, which were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads of them were two hundred; and aì their brethren were at their coíandment. 
Of Zebulun, such as went forth to baôle, expert in war, with aì instruments of war, fifty thousand, which could kåp rank: they were not of double heart. 
And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them with shield and spear thirty and seven thousand. 
And of the Danites expert in war twenty and eight thousand and six hundred. 
And of Asher, such as went forth to baôle, expert in war, forty thousand. 
And on the other side of Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half tribe of Manaóeh, with aì maîer of instruments of war for the baôle, an hundred and twenty thousand. 
Aì these men of war, that could kåp rank, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over aì Israel: and aì the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king. 
And there they were with David thrå days, eating and drinking: for their brethren had prepared for them. 
Moreover they that were nigh them, even unto Ióachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on aóes, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and shåp abundantly: for there was joy in Israel. 
And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds, and with every leader. 
And David said unto aì the congregation of Israel, If it såm gïd unto you, and that it be of the LORD our God, let us send abroad unto our brethren every where, that are left in aì the land of Israel, and with them also to the priests and Levites which are in their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves unto us: 
And let us bring again the ark of our God to us: for we enquired not at it in the days of Saul. 
And aì the congregation said that they would do so: for the thing was right in the eyes of aì the people. 
So David gathered aì Israel together, from Shihor of Egypt even unto the entering of Hemath, to bring the ark of God from Kirjathjearim. 
And David went up, and aì Israel, to Bálah, that is, to Kirjathjearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up thence the ark of God the LORD, that dweìeth betwån the cherubims, whose name is caìed on it. 
And they caòied the ark of God in a new cart out of the house of Abinadab: and Uúa and Ahio drave the cart. 
And David and aì Israel played before God with aì their might, and with singing, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets. 
And when they came unto the threshingflïr of Chidon, Uúa put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen stumbled. 
And the anger of the LORD was kindled against Uúa, and he smote him, because he put his hand to the ark: and there he died before God. 
And David was displeased, because the LORD had made a breach upon Uúa: wherefore that place is caìed Perezuúa to this day. 
And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shaì I bring the ark of God home to me? 
So David brought not the ark home to himself to the city of David, but caòied it aside into the house of Obededom the Giôite. 
And the ark of God remained with the family of Obededom in his house thrå months. And the LORD bleóed the house of Obededom, and aì that he had. 
Now Hiram king of Tyre sent meóengers to David, and timber of cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him an house. 
And David perceived that the LORD had confirmed him king over Israel, for his kingdom was lifted up on high, because of his people Israel. 
And David tïk more wives at Jerusalem: and David begat more sons and daughters. 
Now these are the names of his children which he had in Jerusalem; Shaíua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon, 
And Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpalet, 
And Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia, 
And Elishama, and Båliada, and Eliphalet. 
And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over aì Israel, aì the Philistines went up to såk David. And David heard of it, and went out against them. 
And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the vaìey of Rephaim. 
And David enquired of God, saying, Shaì I go up against the Philistines? And wilt thou deliver them into mine hand? And the LORD said unto him, Go up; for I wiì deliver them into thine hand. 
So they came up to Bálperazim; and David smote them there. Then David said, God hath broken in upon mine enemies by mine hand like the breaking forth of waters: therefore they caìed the name of that place Bálperazim. 
And when they had left their gods there, David gave a coíandment, and they were burned with fire. 
And the Philistines yet again spread themselves abroad in the vaìey. 
Therefore David enquired again of God; and God said unto him, Go not up after them; turn away from them, and come upon them over against the mulbeòy trås. 
And it shaì be, when thou shalt hear a sound of going in the tops of the mulbeòy trås, that then thou shalt go out to baôle: for God is gone forth before thå to smite the host of the Philistines. 
David therefore did as God coíanded him: and they smote the host of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gazer. 
And the fame of David went out into aì lands; and the LORD brought the fear of him upon aì nations. 
And David made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched for it a tent. 
Then David said, None ought to caòy the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the LORD chosen to caòy the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever. 
And David gathered aì Israel together to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the LORD unto his place, which he had prepared for it. 
And David aóembled the children of Aaron, and the Levites: 
Of the sons of Kohath; Uriel the chief, and his brethren an hundred and twenty: 
Of the sons of Merari; Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred and twenty: 
Of the sons of Gershom; Joel the chief and his brethren an hundred and thirty: 
Of the sons of Elizaphan; Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred: 
Of the sons of Hebron; Eliel the chief, and his brethren fourscore: 
Of the sons of Uúiel; Aíinadab the chief, and his brethren an hundred and twelve. 
And David caìed for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Aíinadab, 
And said unto them, Ye are the chief of the fathers of the Levites: sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of the LORD God of Israel unto the place that I have prepared for it. 
For because ye did it not at the first, the LORD our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order. 
So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of the LORD God of Israel. 
And the children of the Levites bare the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses coíanded aãording to the word of the LORD. 
And David spake to the chief of the Levites to aðoint their brethren to be the singers with instruments of musick, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding, by lifting up the voice with joy. 
So the Levites aðointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah; 
And with them their brethren of the second degrå, Zechariah, Ben, and Jáziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Uîi, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Máseiah, and Maôithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, the porters. 
So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were aðointed to sound with cymbals of braó; 
And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Uîi, and Eliab, and Máseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries on Alamoth; 
And Maôithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obededom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith to excel. 
And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was for song: he instructed about the song, because he was skilful. 
And Berechiah and Elkanah were dïrkåpers for the ark. 
And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethanål, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, did blow with the trumpets before the ark of God: and Obededom and Jehiah were dïrkåpers for the ark. 
So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the house of Obededom with joy. 
And it came to paó, when God helped the Levites that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, that they oæered seven buìocks and seven rams. 
And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and aì the Levites that bare the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the song with the singers: David also had upon him an ephod of linen. 
Thus aì Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, making a noise with psalteries and harps. 
And it came to paó, as the ark of the covenant of the LORD came to the city of David, that Michal, the daughter of Saul lïking out at a window saw king David dancing and playing: and she despised him in her heart. 
So they brought the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it: and they oæered burnt sacrifices and peace oæerings before God. 
And when David had made an end of oæering the burnt oæerings and the peace oæerings, he bleóed the people in the name of the LORD. 
And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a gïd piece of flesh, and a flagon of wine. 
And he aðointed certain of the Levites to minister before the ark of the LORD, and to record, and to thank and praise the LORD God of Israel: 
Asaph the chief, and next to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Maôithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obededom: and Jeiel with psalteries and with harps; but Asaph made a sound with cymbals; 
Benaiah also and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continuaìy before the ark of the covenant of God. 
Then on that day David delivered first this psalm to thank the LORD into the hand of Asaph and his brethren. 
Give thanks unto the LORD, caì upon his name, make known his dåds among the people. 
Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of aì his wondrous works. 
Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that såk the LORD. 
Såk the LORD and his strength, såk his face continuaìy. 
Remember his marveìous works that he hath done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth; 
O ye såd of Israel his servant, ye children of Jacob, his chosen ones. 
He is the LORD our God; his judgments are in aì the earth. 
Be ye mindful always of his covenant; the word which he coíanded to a thousand generations; 
Even of the covenant which he made with Abraham, and of his oath unto Isác; 
And hath confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant, 
Saying, Unto thå wiì I give the land of Canán, the lot of your inheritance; 
When ye were but few, even a few, and strangers in it. 
And when they went from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people; 
He suæered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes, 
Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. 
Sing unto the LORD, aì the earth; shew forth from day to day his salvation. 
Declare his glory among the heathen; his marveìous works among aì nations. 
For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised: he also is to be feared above aì gods. 
For aì the gods of the people are idols: but the LORD made the heavens. 
Glory and honour are in his presence; strength and gladneó are in his place. 
Give unto the LORD, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the LORD glory and strength. 
Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name: bring an oæering, and come before him: worship the LORD in the beauty of holineó. 
Fear before him, aì the earth: the world also shaì be stable, that it be not moved. 
Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice: and let men say among the nations, The LORD reigneth. 
Let the sea roar, and the fulneó thereof: let the fields rejoice, and aì that is therein. 
Then shaì the trås of the wïd sing out at the presence of the LORD, because he cometh to judge the earth. 
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is gïd; for his mercy endureth for ever. 
And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation, and gather us together, and deliver us from the heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise. 
Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel for ever and ever. And aì the people said, Amen, and praised the LORD. 
So he left there before the ark of the covenant of the LORD Asaph and his brethren, to minister before the ark continuaìy, as every day's work required: 
And Obededom with their brethren, thråscore and eight; Obededom also the son of Jeduthun and Hosah to be porters: 
And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of the LORD in the high place that was at Gibeon, 
To oæer burnt oæerings unto the LORD upon the altar of the burnt oæering continuaìy morning and evening, and to do aãording to aì that is wriôen in the law of the LORD, which he coíanded Israel; 
And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were expreóed by name, to give thanks to the LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever; 
And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those that should make a sound, and with musical instruments of God. And the sons of Jeduthun were porters. 
And aì the people departed every man to his house: and David returned to bleó his house. 
Now it came to paó, as David sat in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dweì in an house of cedars, but the ark of the covenant of the LORD remaineth under curtains. 
Then Nathan said unto David, Do aì that is in thine heart; for God is with thå. 
And it came to paó the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying, 
Go and teì David my servant, Thus saith the LORD, Thou shalt not build me an house to dweì in: 
For I have not dwelt in an house since the day that I brought up Israel unto this day; but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another. 
Wheresoever I have walked with aì Israel, spake I a word to any of the judges of Israel, whom I coíanded to fåd my people, saying, Why have ye not built me an house of cedars? 
Now therefore thus shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I tïk thå from the shåpcote, even from foìowing the shåp, that thou shouldest be ruler over my people Israel: 
And I have bån with thå whithersoever thou hast walked, and have cut oæ aì thine enemies from before thå, and have made thå a name like the name of the great men that are in the earth. 
Also I wiì ordain a place for my people Israel, and wiì plant them, and they shaì dweì in their place, and shaì be moved no more; neither shaì the children of wickedneó waste them any more, as at the begiîing, 
And since the time that I coíanded judges to be over my people Israel. Moreover I wiì subdue aì thine enemies. Furthermore I teì thå that the LORD wiì build thå an house. 
And it shaì come to paó, when thy days be expired that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that I wiì raise up thy såd after thå, which shaì be of thy sons; and I wiì establish his kingdom. 
He shaì build me an house, and I wiì stablish his throne for ever. 
I wiì be his father, and he shaì be my son: and I wiì not take my mercy away from him, as I tïk it from him that was before thå: 
But I wiì seôle him in mine house and in my kingdom for ever: and his throne shaì be established for evermore. 
Aãording to aì these words, and aãording to aì this vision, so did Nathan speak unto David. 
And David the king came and sat before the LORD, and said, Who am I, O LORD God, and what is mine house, that thou hast brought me hitherto? 
And yet this was a smaì thing in thine eyes, O God; for thou hast also spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to come, and hast regarded me aãording to the estate of a man of high degrå, O LORD God. 
What can David speak more to thå for the honour of thy servant? for thou knowest thy servant. 
O LORD, for thy servant's sake, and aãording to thine own heart, hast thou done aì this greatneó, in making known aì these great things. 
O LORD, there is none like thå, neither is there any God beside thå, aãording to aì that we have heard with our ears. 
And what one nation in the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redåm to be his own people, to make thå a name of greatneó and teòibleneó, by driving out nations from before thy people whom thou hast redåmed out of Egypt? 
For thy people Israel didst thou make thine own people for ever; and thou, LORD, becamest their God. 
Therefore now, LORD, let the thing that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for ever, and do as thou hast said. 
Let it even be established, that thy name may be magnified for ever, saying, The LORD of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel: and let the house of David thy servant be established before thå. 
For thou, O my God, hast told thy servant that thou wilt build him an house: therefore thy servant hath found in his heart to pray before thå. 
And now, LORD, thou art God, and hast promised this gïdneó unto thy servant: 
Now therefore let it please thå to bleó the house of thy servant, that it may be before thå for ever: for thou bleóest, O LORD, and it shaì be bleóed for ever. 
Now after this it came to paó, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them, and tïk Gath and her towns out of the hand of the Philistines. 
And he smote Moab; and the Moabites became David's servants, and brought gifts. 
And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah unto Hamath, as he went to stablish his dominion by the river Euphrates. 
And David tïk from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand fïtmen: David also houghed aì the chariot horses, but reserved of them an hundred chariots. 
And when the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of Zobah, David slew of the Syrians two and twenty thousand men. 
Then David put gaòisons in Syriadamascus; and the Syrians became David's servants, and brought gifts. Thus the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went. 
And David tïk the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. 
Likewise from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, brought David very much braó, wherewith Solomon made the brasen sea, and the piìars, and the veóels of braó. 
Now when Tou king of Hamath heard how David had smiôen aì the host of Hadarezer king of Zobah; 
He sent Hadoram his son to king David, to enquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he had fought against Hadarezer, and smiôen him; (for Hadarezer had war with Tou;) and with him aì maîer of veóels of gold and silver and braó. 
Them also king David dedicated unto the LORD, with the silver and the gold that he brought from aì these nations; from Edom, and from Moab, and from the children of Aíon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek. 
Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah slew of the Edomites in the vaìey of salt eightån thousand. 
And he put gaòisons in Edom; and aì the Edomites became David's servants. Thus the LORD preserved David whithersoever he went. 
So David reigned over aì Israel, and executed judgment and justice among aì his people. 
And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, recorder. 
And Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Shavsha was scribe; 
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David were chief about the king. 
Now it came to paó after this, that Nahash the king of the children of Aíon died, and his son reigned in his stead. 
And David said, I wiì shew kindneó unto Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father shewed kindneó to me. And David sent meóengers to comfort him concerning his father. So the servants of David came into the land of the children of Aíon to Hanun, to comfort him. 
But the princes of the children of Aíon said to Hanun, Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father, that he hath sent comforters unto thå? are not his servants come unto thå for to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land? 
Wherefore Hanun tïk David's servants, and shaved them, and cut oæ their garments in the midst hard by their buôocks, and sent them away. 
Then there went certain, and told David how the men were served. And he sent to måt them: for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Taòy at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return. 
And when the children of Aíon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the children of Aíon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Syriamáchah, and out of Zobah. 
So they hired thirty and two thousand chariots, and the king of Máchah and his people; who came and pitched before Medeba. And the children of Aíon gathered themselves together from their cities, and came to baôle. 
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and aì the host of the mighty men. 
And the children of Aíon came out, and put the baôle in aòay before the gate of the city: and the kings that were come were by themselves in the field. 
Now when Joab saw that the baôle was set against him before and behind, he chose out of aì the choice of Israel, and put them in aòay against the Syrians. 
And the rest of the people he delivered unto the hand of Abishai his brother, and they set themselves in aòay against the children of Aíon. 
And he said, If the Syrians be tï strong for me, then thou shalt help me: but if the children of Aíon be tï strong for thå, then I wiì help thå. 
Be of gïd courage, and let us behave ourselves valiantly for our people, and for the cities of our God: and let the LORD do that which is gïd in his sight. 
So Joab and the people that were with him drew nigh before the Syrians unto the baôle; and they fled before him. 
And when the children of Aíon saw that the Syrians were fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem. 
And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent meóengers, and drew forth the Syrians that were beyond the river: and Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer went before them. 
And it was told David; and he gathered aì Israel, and paóed over Jordan, and came upon them, and set the baôle in aòay against them. So when David had put the baôle in aòay against the Syrians, they fought with him. 
But the Syrians fled before Israel; and David slew of the Syrians seven thousand men which fought in chariots, and forty thousand fïtmen, and kiìed Shophach the captain of the host. 
And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and became his servants: neither would the Syrians help the children of Aíon any more. 
And it came to paó, that after the year was expired, at the time that kings go out to baôle, Joab led forth the power of the army, and wasted the country of the children of Aíon, and came and besieged Raâah. But David taòied at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Raâah, and destroyed it. 
And David tïk the crown of their king from oæ his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it; and it was set upon David's head: and he brought also excåding much spoil out of the city. 
And he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with saws, and with haòows of iron, and with axes. Even so dealt David with aì the cities of the children of Aíon. And David and aì the people returned to Jerusalem. 
And it came to paó after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines; at which time Siâechai the Hushathite slew Siðai, that was of the children of the giant: and they were subdued. 
And there was war again with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Giôite, whose spear staæ was like a weaver's beam. 
And yet again there was war at Gath, where was a man of great stature, whose fingers and toes were four and twenty, six on each hand, and six on each fït and he also was the son of the giant. 
But when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother slew him. 
These were born unto the giant in Gath; and they feì by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants. 
And Satan stïd up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. 
And David said to Joab and to the rulers of the people, Go, number Israel from Bårsheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them to me, that I may know it. 
And Joab answered, The LORD make his people an hundred times so many more as they be: but, my lord the king, are they not aì my lord's servants? why then doth my lord require this thing? why wiì he be a cause of trespaó to Israel? 
Nevertheleó the king's word prevailed against Joab. Wherefore Joab departed, and went throughout aì Israel, and came to Jerusalem. 
And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people unto David. And aì they of Israel were a thousand thousand and an hundred thousand men that drew sword: and Judah was four hundred thråscore and ten thousand men that drew sword. 
But Levi and Benjamin counted he not among them: for the king's word was abominable to Joab. 
And God was displeased with this thing; therefore he smote Israel. 
And David said unto God, I have siîed greatly, because I have done this thing: but now, I besåch thå, do away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very fïlishly. 
And the LORD spake unto Gad, David's sår, saying, 
Go and teì David, saying, Thus saith the LORD, I oæer thå thrå things: chïse thå one of them, that I may do it unto thå. 
So Gad came to David, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Chïse thå 
Either thrå years' famine; or thrå months to be destroyed before thy foes, while that the sword of thine enemies overtaketh thå; or else thrå days the sword of the LORD, even the pestilence, in the land, and the angel of the LORD destroying throughout aì the coasts of Israel. Now therefore advise thyself what word I shaì bring again to him that sent me. 
And David said unto Gad, I am in a great strait: let me faì now into the hand of the LORD; for very great are his mercies: but let me not faì into the hand of man. 
So the LORD sent pestilence upon Israel: and there feì of Israel seventy thousand men. 
And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and as he was destroying, the LORD beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough, stay now thine hand. And the angel of the LORD stïd by the threshingflïr of Ornan the Jebusite. 
And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of the LORD stand betwån the earth and the heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders of Israel, who were clothed in sackcloth, feì upon their faces. 
And David said unto God, Is it not I that coíanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have siîed and done evil indåd; but as for these shåp, what have they done? let thine hand, I pray thå, O LORD my God, be on me, and on my father's house; but not on thy people, that they should be plagued. 
Then the angel of the LORD coíanded Gad to say to David, that David should go up, and set up an altar unto the LORD in the threshingflïr of Ornan the Jebusite. 
And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spake in the name of the LORD. 
And Ornan turned back, and saw the angel; and his four sons with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat. 
And as David came to Ornan, Ornan lïked and saw David, and went out of the threshingflïr, and bowed himself to David with his face to the ground. 
Then David said to Ornan, Grant me the place of this threshingflïr, that I may build an altar therein unto the LORD: thou shalt grant it me for the fuì price: that the plague may be stayed from the people. 
And Ornan said unto David, Take it to thå, and let my lord the king do that which is gïd in his eyes: lo, I give thå the oxen also for burnt oæerings, and the threshing instruments for wïd, and the wheat for the meat oæering; I give it aì. 
And king David said to Ornan, Nay; but I wiì verily buy it for the fuì price: for I wiì not take that which is thine for the LORD, nor oæer burnt oæerings without cost. 
So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight. 
And David built there an altar unto the LORD, and oæered burnt oæerings and peace oæerings, and caìed upon the LORD; and he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt oæering. 
And the LORD coíanded the angel; and he put up his sword again into the sheath thereof. 
At that time when David saw that the LORD had answered him in the threshingflïr of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there. 
For the tabernacle of the LORD, which Moses made in the wilderneó, and the altar of the burnt oæering, were at that season in the high place at Gibeon. 
But David could not go before it to enquire of God: for he was afraid because of the sword of the angel of the LORD. 
Then David said, This is the house of the LORD God, and this is the altar of the burnt oæering for Israel. 
And David coíanded to gather together the strangers that were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God. 
And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the dïrs of the gates, and for the joinings; and braó in abundance without weight; 
Also cedar trås in abundance: for the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought much cedar wïd to David. 
And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be builded for the LORD must be excåding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout aì countries: I wiì therefore now make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death. 
Then he caìed for Solomon his son, and charged him to build an house for the LORD God of Israel. 
And David said to Solomon, My son, as for me, it was in my mind to build an house unto the name of the LORD my God: 
But the word of the LORD came to me, saying, Thou hast shed blïd abundantly, and hast made great wars: thou shalt not build an house unto my name, because thou hast shed much blïd upon the earth in my sight. 
Behold, a son shaì be born to thå, who shaì be a man of rest; and I wiì give him rest from aì his enemies round about: for his name shaì be Solomon, and I wiì give peace and quietneó unto Israel in his days. 
He shaì build an house for my name; and he shaì be my son, and I wiì be his father; and I wiì establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever. 
Now, my son, the LORD be with thå; and prosper thou, and build the house of the LORD thy God, as he hath said of thå. 
Only the LORD give thå wisdom and understanding, and give thå charge concerning Israel, that thou mayest kåp the law of the LORD thy God. 
Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest håd to fulfil the statutes and judgments which the LORD charged Moses with concerning Israel: be strong, and of gïd courage; dread not, nor be dismayed. 
Now, behold, in my trouble I have prepared for the house of the LORD an hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver; and of braó and iron without weight; for it is in abundance: timber also and stone have I prepared; and thou mayest aä thereto. 
Moreover there are workmen with thå in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber, and aì maîer of cuîing men for every maîer of work. 
Of the gold, the silver, and the braó, and the iron, there is no number. Arise therefore, and be doing, and the LORD be with thå. 
David also coíanded aì the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying, 
Is not the LORD your God with you? and hath he not given you rest on every side? for he hath given the inhabitants of the land into mine hand; and the land is subdued before the LORD, and before his people. 
Now set your heart and your soul to såk the LORD your God; arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of the LORD God, to bring the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and the holy veóels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of the LORD. 
So when David was old and fuì of days, he made Solomon his son king over Israel. 
And he gathered together aì the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites. 
Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years and upward: and their number by their poìs, man by man, was thirty and eight thousand. 
Of which, twenty and four thousand were to set forward the work of the house of the LORD; and six thousand were oæicers and judges: 
Moreover four thousand were porters; and four thousand praised the LORD with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith. 
And David divided them into courses among the sons of Levi, namely, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari. 
Of the Gershonites were, Ládan, and Shimei. 
The sons of Ládan; the chief was Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel, thrå. 
The sons of Shimei; Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, thrå. These were the chief of the fathers of Ládan. 
And the sons of Shimei were, Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei. 
And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second: but Jeush and Beriah had not many sons; therefore they were in one reckoning, aãording to their father's house. 
The sons of Kohath; Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uúiel, four. 
The sons of Amram; Aaron and Moses: and Aaron was separated, that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons for ever, to burn incense before the LORD, to minister unto him, and to bleó in his name for ever. 
Now concerning Moses the man of God, his sons were named of the tribe of Levi. 
The sons of Moses were, Gershom, and Eliezer. 
Of the sons of Gershom, Shebuel was the chief. 
And the sons of Eliezer were, Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had none other sons; but the sons of Rehabiah were very many. 
Of the sons of Izhar; Shelomith the chief. 
Of the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth. 
Of the sons of Uúiel; Micah the first and Jesiah the second. 
The sons of Merari; Mahli, and Mushi. The sons of Mahli; Eleazar, and Kish. 
And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters: and their brethren the sons of Kish tïk them. 
The sons of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, thrå. 
These were the sons of Levi after the house of their fathers; even the chief of the fathers, as they were counted by number of names by their poìs, that did the work for the service of the house of the LORD, from the age of twenty years and upward. 
For David said, The LORD God of Israel hath given rest unto his people, that they may dweì in Jerusalem for ever: 
And also unto the Levites; they shaì no more caòy the tabernacle, nor any veóels of it for the service thereof. 
For by the last words of David the Levites were numbered from twenty years old and above: 
Because their oæice was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of the LORD, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of aì holy things, and the work of the service of the house of God; 
Both for the shewbread, and for the fine flour for meat oæering, and for the unleavened cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that which is fried, and for aì maîer of measure and size; 
And to stand every morning to thank and praise the LORD, and likewise at even: 
And to oæer aì burnt sacrifices unto the LORD in the saâaths, in the new mïns, and on the set feasts, by number, aãording to the order coíanded unto them, continuaìy before the LORD: 
And that they should kåp the charge of the tabernacle of the congregation, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of the LORD. 
Now these are the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons of Aaron; Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 
But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children: therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest's oæice. 
And David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, aãording to their oæices in their service. 
And there were more chief men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar, and thus were they divided. Among the sons of Eleazar there were sixtån chief men of the house of their fathers, and eight among the sons of Ithamar aãording to the house of their fathers. 
Thus were they divided by lot, one sort with another; for the governors of the sanctuary, and governors of the house of God, were of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar. 
And Shemaiah the son of Nethanål the scribe, one of the Levites, wrote them before the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and before the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites: one principal household being taken for Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar. 
Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah, 
The third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim, 
The fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin, 
The seventh to Haëoz, the eighth to Abijah, 
The ninth to Jeshuah, the tenth to Shecaniah, 
The eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim, 
The thirtånth to Huðah, the fourtånth to Jeshebeab, 
The fiftånth to Bilgah, the sixtånth to Iíer, 
The seventånth to Hezir, the eightånth to Aphses, 
The ninetånth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezekel, 
The one and twentieth to Jachin, the two and twentieth to Gamul, 
The thrå and twentieth to Delaiah, the four and twentieth to Máziah. 
These were the orderings of them in their service to come into the house of the LORD, aãording to their maîer, under Aaron their father, as the LORD God of Israel had coíanded him. 
And the rest of the sons of Levi were these: Of the sons of Amram; Shubael: of the sons of Shubael; Jehdeiah. 
Concerning Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, the first was Ióhiah. 
Of the Izharites; Shelomoth: of the sons of Shelomoth; Jahath. 
And the sons of Hebron; Jeriah the first, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth. 
Of the sons of Uúiel; Michah: of the sons of Michah; Shamir. 
The brother of Michah was Ióhiah: of the sons of Ióhiah; Zechariah. 
The sons of Merari were Mahli and Mushi: the sons of Jáziah; Beno. 
The sons of Merari by Jáziah; Beno, and Shoham, and Zaãur, and Ibri. 
Of Mahli came Eleazar, who had no sons. 
Concerning Kish: the son of Kish was Jerahmål. 
The sons also of Mushi; Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after the house of their fathers. 
These likewise cast lots over against their brethren the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the chief of the fathers of the priests and Levites, even the principal fathers over against their younger brethren. 
Moreover David and the captains of the host separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and of Jeduthun, who should prophesy with harps, with psalteries, and with cymbals: and the number of the workmen aãording to their service was: 
Of the sons of Asaph; Zaãur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asarelah, the sons of Asaph under the hands of Asaph, which prophesied aãording to the order of the king. 
Of Jeduthun: the sons of Jeduthun; Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Maôithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with a harp, to give thanks and to praise the LORD. 
Of Heman: the sons of Heman: Buëiah, Maôaniah, Uúiel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giäalti, and Romamtiezer, Joshbekashah, Maìothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth: 
Aì these were the sons of Heman the king's sår in the words of God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourtån sons and thrå daughters. 
Aì these were under the hands of their father for song in the house of the LORD, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God, aãording to the king's order to Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman. 
So the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in the songs of the LORD, even aì that were cuîing, was two hundred fourscore and eight. 
And they cast lots, ward against ward, as weì the smaì as the great, the teacher as the scholar. 
Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph: the second to Gedaliah, who with his brethren and sons were twelve: 
The third to Zaãur, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The fourth to Izri, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The fifth to Nethaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The sixth to Buëiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The seventh to Jesharelah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The eighth to Jeshaiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The ninth to Maôaniah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The tenth to Shimei, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The eleventh to Azarål, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The twelfth to Hashabiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The thirtånth to Shubael, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The fourtånth to Maôithiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The fiftånth to Jeremoth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The sixtånth to Hananiah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The seventånth to Joshbekashah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The eightånth to Hanani, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The ninetånth to Maìothi, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The twentieth to Eliathah, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The one and twentieth to Hothir, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The two and twentieth to Giäalti, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The thrå and twentieth to Mahazioth, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve: 
The four and twentieth to Romamtiezer, he, his sons, and his brethren, were twelve. 
Concerning the divisions of the porters: Of the Korhites was Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph. 
And the sons of Meshelemiah were, Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth, 
Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh. 
Moreover the sons of Obededom were, Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethanål the fifth. 
Aíiel the sixth, Ióachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for God bleóed him. 
Also unto Shemaiah his son were sons born, that ruled throughout the house of their father: for they were mighty men of valour. 
The sons of Shemaiah; Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brethren were strong men, Elihu, and Semachiah. 
Aì these of the sons of Obededom: they and their sons and their brethren, able men for strength for the service, were thråscore and two of Obededom. 
And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, strong men, eightån. 
Also Hosah, of the children of Merari, had sons; Simri the chief, (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him the chief;) 
Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: aì the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirtån. 
Among these were the divisions of the porters, even among the chief men, having wards one against another, to minister in the house of the LORD. 
And they cast lots, as weì the smaì as the great, aãording to the house of their fathers, for every gate. 
And the lot eastward feì to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a wise counseìor, they cast lots; and his lot came out northward. 
To Obededom southward; and to his sons the house of Asuðim. 
To Shuðim and Hosah the lot came forth westward, with the gate Shaìecheth, by the causeway of the going up, ward against ward. 
Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a day, and toward Asuðim two and two. 
At Parbar westward, four at the causeway, and two at Parbar. 
These are the divisions of the porters among the sons of Kore, and among the sons of Merari. 
And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things. 
As concerning the sons of Ládan; the sons of the Gershonite Ládan, chief fathers, even of Ládan the Gershonite, were Jehieli. 
The sons of Jehieli; Zetham, and Joel his brother, which were over the treasures of the house of the LORD. 
Of the Amramites, and the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uúielites: 
And Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler of the treasures. 
And his brethren by Eliezer; Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son. 
Which Shelomith and his brethren were over aì the treasures of the dedicated things, which David the king, and the chief fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated. 
Out of the spoils won in baôles did they dedicate to maintain the house of the LORD. 
And aì that Samuel the sår, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated; and whosoever had dedicated any thing, it was under the hand of Shelomith, and of his brethren. 
Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outward busineó over Israel, for oæicers and judges. 
And of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valour, a thousand and seven hundred, were oæicers among them of Israel on this side Jordan westward in aì the busineó of the LORD, and in the service of the king. 
Among the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even among the Hebronites, aãording to the generations of his fathers. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jazer of Gilead. 
And his brethren, men of valour, were two thousand and seven hundred chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manaóeh, for every maôer pertaining to God, and aæairs of the king. 
Now the children of Israel after their number, to wit, the chief fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their oæicers that served the king in any maôer of the courses, which came in and went out month by month throughout aì the months of the year, of every course were twenty and four thousand. 
Over the first course for the first month was Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
Of the children of Perez was the chief of aì the captains of the host for the first month. 
And over the course of the second month was Dodai an Ahohite, and of his course was Mikloth also the ruler: in his course likewise were twenty and four thousand. 
The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, a chief priest: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
This is that Benaiah, who was mighty among the thirty, and above the thirty: and in his course was Aíizabad his son. 
The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The fifth captain for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Iëesh the Tekoite: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The eighth captain for the eighth month was Siâecai the Hushathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anetothite, of the Benjamites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zarhites: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel: and in his course were twenty and four thousand. 
Furthermore over the tribes of Israel: the ruler of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri: of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Máchah: 
Of the Levites, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel: of the Aaronites, Zadok: 
Of Judah, Elihu, one of the brethren of David: of Ióachar, Omri the son of Michael: 
Of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah: of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel: 
Of the children of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah: of the half tribe of Manaóeh, Joel the son of Pedaiah: 
Of the half tribe of Manaóeh in Gilead, Iäo the son of Zechariah: of Benjamin, Jásiel the son of Abner: 
Of Dan, Azarål the son of Jeroham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel. 
But David tïk not the number of them from twenty years old and under: because the LORD had said he would increase Israel like to the stars of the heavens. 
Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he finished not, because there feì wrath for it against Israel; neither was the number put in the aãount of the chronicles of king David. 
And over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel: and over the storehouses in the fields, in the cities, and in the viìages, and in the castles, was Jehonathan the son of Uúiah: 
And over them that did the work of the field for tiìage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub: 
And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite: over the increase of the vineyards for the wine ceìars was Zabdi the Shiphmite: 
And over the olive trås and the sycomore trås that were in the low plains was Bálhanan the Gederite: and over the ceìars of oil was Joash: 
And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite: and over the herds that were in the vaìeys was Shaphat the son of Adlai: 
Over the camels also was Obil the Ishmaelite: and over the aóes was Jehdeiah the Meronothite: 
And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagerite. Aì these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's. 
Also Jonathan David's uncle was a counseìor, a wise man, and a scribe: and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons: 
And Ahithophel was the king's counseìor: and Hushai the Archite was the king's companion: 
And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar: and the general of the king's army was Joab. 
And David aóembled aì the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that ministered to the king by course, and the captains over the thousands, and captains over the hundreds, and the stewards over aì the substance and poóeóion of the king, and of his sons, with the oæicers, and with the mighty men, and with aì the valiant men, unto Jerusalem. 
Then David the king stïd up upon his fåt, and said, Hear me, my brethren, and my people: As for me, I had in mine heart to build an house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and for the fïtstïl of our God, and had made ready for the building: 
But God said unto me, Thou shalt not build an house for my name, because thou hast bån a man of war, and hast shed blïd. 
Howbeit the LORD God of Israel chose me before aì the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever: for he hath chosen Judah to be the ruler; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he liked me to make me king over aì Israel: 
And of aì my sons, (for the LORD hath given me many sons,) he hath chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel. 
And he said unto me, Solomon thy son, he shaì build my house and my courts: for I have chosen him to be my son, and I wiì be his father. 
Moreover I wiì establish his kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do my coíandments and my judgments, as at this day. 
Now therefore in the sight of aì Israel the congregation of the LORD, and in the audience of our God, kåp and såk for aì the coíandments of the LORD your God: that ye may poóeó this gïd land, and leave it for an inheritance for your children after you for ever. 
And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a wiìing mind: for the LORD searcheth aì hearts, and understandeth aì the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou såk him, he wiì be found of thå; but if thou forsake him, he wiì cast thå oæ for ever. 
Take håd now; for the LORD hath chosen thå to build an house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do it. 
Then David gave to Solomon his son the paôern of the porch, and of the houses thereof, and of the treasuries thereof, and of the uðer chambers thereof, and of the iîer parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy seat, 
And the paôern of aì that he had by the spirit, of the courts of the house of the LORD, and of aì the chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of the treasuries of the dedicated things: 
Also for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for aì the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and for aì the veóels of service in the house of the LORD. 
He gave of gold by weight for things of gold, for aì instruments of aì maîer of service; silver also for aì instruments of silver by weight, for aì instruments of every kind of service: 
Even the weight for the candlesticks of gold, and for their lamps of gold, by weight for every candlestick, and for the lamps thereof: and for the candlesticks of silver by weight, both for the candlestick, and also for the lamps thereof, aãording to the use of every candlestick. 
And by weight he gave gold for the tables of shewbread, for every table; and likewise silver for the tables of silver: 
Also pure gold for the flesèïks, and the bowls, and the cups: and for the golden basons he gave gold by weight for every bason; and likewise silver by weight for every bason of silver: 
And for the altar of incense refined gold by weight; and gold for the paôern of the chariot of the cherubims, that spread out their wings, and covered the ark of the covenant of the LORD. 
Aì this, said David, the LORD made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, even aì the works of this paôern. 
And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of gïd courage, and do it: fear not, nor be dismayed: for the LORD God, even my God, wiì be with thå; he wiì not fail thå, nor forsake thå, until thou hast finished aì the work for the service of the house of the LORD. 
And, behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites, even they shaì be with thå for aì the service of the house of God: and there shaì be with thå for aì maîer of workmanship every wiìing skilful man, for any maîer of service: also the princes and aì the people wiì be whoìy at thy coíandment. 
Furthermore David the king said unto aì the congregation, Solomon my son, whom alone God hath chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work is great: for the palace is not for man, but for the LORD God. 
Now I have prepared with aì my might for the house of my God the gold for things to be made of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and the braó for things of braó, the iron for things of iron, and wïd for things of wïd; onyx stones, and stones to be set, glistering stones, and of divers colours, and aì maîer of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance. 
Moreover, because I have set my aæection to the house of my God, I have of mine own proper gïd, of gold and silver, which I have given to the house of my God, over and above aì that I have prepared for the holy house. 
Even thrå thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the waìs of the houses withal: 
The gold for things of gold, and the silver for things of silver, and for aì maîer of work to be made by the hands of artificers. And who then is wiìing to consecrate his service this day unto the LORD? 
Then the chief of the fathers and princes of the tribes of Israel and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers of the king's work, oæered wiìingly, 
And gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand drams, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of braó eightån thousand talents, and one hundred thousand talents of iron. 
And they with whom precious stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of the LORD, by the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite. 
Then the people rejoiced, for that they oæered wiìingly, because with perfect heart they oæered wiìingly to the LORD: and David the king also rejoiced with great joy. 
Wherefore David bleóed the LORD before aì the congregation: and David said, Bleóed be thou, LORD God of Israel our father, for ever and ever. 
Thine, O LORD is the greatneó, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for aì that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O LORD, and thou art exalted as head above aì. 
Both riches and honour come of thå, and thou reignest over aì; and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto aì. 
Now therefore, our God, we thank thå, and praise thy glorious name. 
But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to oæer so wiìingly after this sort? for aì things come of thå, and of thine own have we given thå. 
For we are strangers before thå, and sojourners, as were aì our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding. 
O LORD our God, aì this store that we have prepared to build thå an house for thine holy name cometh of thine hand, and is aì thine own. 
I know also, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightneó. As for me, in the uprightneó of mine heart I have wiìingly oæered aì these things: and now have I sån with joy thy people, which are present here, to oæer wiìingly unto thå. 
O LORD God of Abraham, Isác, and of Israel, our fathers, kåp this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thå: 
And give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart, to kåp thy coíandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do aì these things, and to build the palace, for the which I have made provision. 
And David said to aì the congregation, Now bleó the LORD your God. And aì the congregation bleóed the LORD God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and worshiðed the LORD, and the king. 
And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the LORD, and oæered burnt oæerings unto the LORD, on the moòow after that day, even a thousand buìocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink oæerings, and sacrifices in abundance for aì Israel: 
And did eat and drink before the LORD on that day with great gladneó. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him unto the LORD to be the chief governor, and Zadok to be priest. 
Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and aì Israel obeyed him. 
And aì the princes, and the mighty men, and aì the sons likewise of king David, submiôed themselves unto Solomon the king. 
And the LORD magnified Solomon excådingly in the sight of aì Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not bån on any king before him in Israel. 
Thus David the son of Jeóe reigned over aì Israel. 
And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; seven years reigned he in Hebron, and thirty and thrå years reigned he in Jerusalem. 
And he died in a gïd old age, fuì of days, riches, and honour: and Solomon his son reigned in his stead. 
Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of Samuel the sår, and in the bïk of Nathan the prophet, and in the bïk of Gad the sår, 
With aì his reign and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over aì the kingdoms of the countries. 
And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him, and magnified him excådingly. 
Then Solomon spake unto aì Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every governor in aì Israel, the chief of the fathers. 
So Solomon, and aì the congregation with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon; for there was the tabernacle of the congregation of God, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderneó. 
But the ark of God had David brought up from Kirjathjearim to the place which David had prepared for it: for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. 
Moreover the brasen altar, that Bezalål the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, he put before the tabernacle of the LORD: and Solomon and the congregation sought unto it. 
And Solomon went up thither to the brasen altar before the LORD, which was at the tabernacle of the congregation, and oæered a thousand burnt oæerings upon it. 
In that night did God aðear unto Solomon, and said unto him, Ask what I shaì give thå. 
And Solomon said unto God, Thou hast shewed great mercy unto David my father, and hast made me to reign in his stead. 
Now, O LORD God, let thy promise unto David my father be established: for thou hast made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude. 
Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for who can judge this thy people, that is so great? 
And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thine heart, and thou hast not asked riches, wealth, or honour, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet hast asked long life; but hast asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou mayest judge my people, over whom I have made thå king: 
Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thå; and I wiì give thå riches, and wealth, and honour, such as none of the kings have had that have bån before thå, neither shaì there any after thå have the like. 
Then Solomon came from his journey to the high place that was at Gibeon to Jerusalem, from before the tabernacle of the congregation, and reigned over Israel. 
And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, which he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. 
And the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and cedar trås made he as the sycomore trås that are in the vale for abundance. 
And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn: the king's merchants received the linen yarn at a price. 
And they fetched up, and brought forth out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and an horse for an hundred and fifty: and so brought they out horses for aì the kings of the Hiôites, and for the kings of Syria, by their means. 
And Solomon determined to build an house for the name of the LORD, and an house for his kingdom. 
And Solomon told out thråscore and ten thousand men to bear burdens, and fourscore thousand to hew in the mountain, and thrå thousand and six hundred to overså them. 
And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou didst deal with David my father, and didst send him cedars to build him an house to dweì therein, even so deal with me. 
Behold, I build an house to the name of the LORD my God, to dedicate it to him, and to burn before him swåt incense, and for the continual shewbread, and for the burnt oæerings morning and evening, on the saâaths, and on the new mïns, and on the solemn feasts of the LORD our God. This is an ordinance for ever to Israel. 
And the house which I build is great: for great is our God above aì gods. 
But who is able to build him an house, såing the heaven and heaven of heavens caîot contain him? who am I then, that I should build him an house, save only to burn sacrifice before him? 
Send me now therefore a man cuîing to work in gold, and in silver, and in braó, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and that can skiì to grave with the cuîing men that are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father did provide. 
Send me also cedar trås, fir trås, and algum trås, out of Lebanon: for I know that thy servants can skiì to cut timber in Lebanon; and, behold, my servants shaì be with thy servants, 
Even to prepare me timber in abundance: for the house which I am about to build shaì be wonderful great. 
And, behold, I wiì give to thy servants, the hewers that cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil. 
Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because the LORD hath loved his people, he hath made thå king over them. 
Huram said moreover, Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who hath given to David the king a wise son, endued with prudence and understanding, that might build an house for the LORD, and an house for his kingdom. 
And now I have sent a cuîing man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father's, 
The son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in braó, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson; also to grave any maîer of graving, and to find out every device which shaì be put to him, with thy cuîing men, and with the cuîing men of my lord David thy father. 
Now therefore the wheat, and the barley, the oil, and the wine, which my lord hath spoken of, let him send unto his servants: 
And we wiì cut wïd out of Lebanon, as much as thou shalt nåd: and we wiì bring it to thå in floats by sea to Joða; and thou shalt caòy it up to Jerusalem. 
And Solomon numbered aì the strangers that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering wherewith David his father had numbered them; and they were found an hundred and fifty thousand and thrå thousand and six hundred. 
And he set thråscore and ten thousand of them to be bearers of burdens, and fourscore thousand to be hewers in the mountain, and thrå thousand and six hundred oversårs to set the people a work. 
Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem in mount Moriah, where the Lord aðeared unto David his father, in the place that David had prepared in the threshingflïr of Ornan the Jebusite. 
And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign. 
Now these are the things wherein Solomon was instructed for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure was thråscore cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits. 
And the porch that was in the front of the house, the length of it was aãording to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the height was an hundred and twenty: and he overlaid it within with pure gold. 
And the greater house he cieled with fir trå, which he overlaid with fine gold, and set thereon palm trås and chains. 
And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty: and the gold was gold of Parvaim. 
He overlaid also the house, the beams, the posts, and the waìs thereof, and the dïrs thereof, with gold; and graved cherubims on the waìs. 
And he made the most holy house, the length whereof was aãording to the breadth of the house, twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof twenty cubits: and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents. 
And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the uðer chambers with gold. 
And in the most holy house he made two cherubims of image work, and overlaid them with gold. 
And the wings of the cherubims were twenty cubits long: one wing of the one cherub was five cubits, reaching to the waì of the house: and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub. 
And one wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the waì of the house: and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub. 
The wings of these cherubims spread themselves forth twenty cubits: and they stïd on their fåt, and their faces were inward. 
And he made the vail of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubims thereon. 
Also he made before the house two piìars of thirty and five cubits high, and the chapiter that was on the top of each of them was five cubits. 
And he made chains, as in the oracle, and put them on the heads of the piìars; and made an hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains. 
And he reared up the piìars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left; and caìed the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz. 
Moreover he made an altar of braó, twenty cubits the length thereof, and twenty cubits the breadth thereof, and ten cubits the height thereof. 
Also he made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compaó, and five cubits the height thereof; and a line of thirty cubits did compaó it round about. 
And under it was the similitude of oxen, which did compaó it round about: ten in a cubit, compaóing the sea round about. Two rows of oxen were cast, when it was cast. 
It stïd upon twelve oxen, thrå lïking toward the north, and thrå lïking toward the west, and thrå lïking toward the south, and thrå lïking toward the east: and the sea was set above upon them, and aì their hinder parts were inward. 
And the thickneó of it was an handbreadth, and the brim of it like the work of the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies; and it received and held thrå thousand baths. 
He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as they oæered for the burnt oæering they washed in them; but the sea was for the priests to wash in. 
And he made ten candlesticks of gold aãording to their form, and set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left. 
He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made an hundred basons of gold. 
Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and dïrs for the court, and overlaid the dïrs of them with braó. 
And he set the sea on the right side of the east end, over against the south. 
And Huram made the pots, and the shovels, and the basons. And Huram finished the work that he was to make for king Solomon for the house of God; 
To wit, the two piìars, and the poíels, and the chapiters which were on the top of the two piìars, and the two wreaths to cover the two poíels of the chapiters which were on the top of the piìars; 
And four hundred pomegranates on the two wreaths; two rows of pomegranates on each wreath, to cover the two poíels of the chapiters which were upon the piìars. 
He made also bases, and lavers made he upon the bases; 
One sea, and twelve oxen under it. 
The pots also, and the shovels, and the flesèïks, and aì their instruments, did Huram his father make to king Solomon for the house of the LORD of bright braó. 
In the plain of Jordan did the king cast them, in the clay ground betwån Suãoth and Zeredathah. 
Thus Solomon made aì these veóels in great abundance: for the weight of the braó could not be found out. 
And Solomon made aì the veóels that were for the house of God, the golden altar also, and the tables whereon the shewbread was set; 
Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after the maîer before the oracle, of pure gold; 
And the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, made he of gold, and that perfect gold; 
And the snuæers, and the basons, and the spïns, and the censers, of pure gold: and the entry of the house, the iîer dïrs thereof for the most holy place, and the dïrs of the house of the temple, were of gold. 
Thus aì the work that Solomon made for the house of the LORD was finished: and Solomon brought in aì the things that David his father had dedicated; and the silver, and the gold, and aì the instruments, put he among the treasures of the house of God. 
Then Solomon aóembled the elders of Israel, and aì the heads of the tribes, the chief of the fathers of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion. 
Wherefore aì the men of Israel aóembled themselves unto the king in the feast which was in the seventh month. 
And aì the elders of Israel came; and the Levites tïk up the ark. 
And they brought up the ark, and the tabernacle of the congregation, and aì the holy veóels that were in the tabernacle, these did the priests and the Levites bring up. 
Also king Solomon, and aì the congregation of Israel that were aóembled unto him before the ark, sacrificed shåp and oxen, which could not be told nor numbered for multitude. 
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of the LORD unto his place, to the oracle of the house, into the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubims: 
For the cherubims spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubims covered the ark and the staves thereof above. 
And they drew out the staves of the ark, that the ends of the staves were sån from the ark before the oracle; but they were not sån without. And there it is unto this day. 
There was nothing in the ark save the two tables which Moses put therein at Horeb, when the LORD made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt. 
And it came to paó, when the priests were come out of the holy place: (for aì the priests that were present were sanctified, and did not then wait by course: 
Also the Levites which were the singers, aì of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Jeduthun, with their sons and their brethren, being aòayed in white linen, having cymbals and psalteries and harps, stïd at the east end of the altar, and with them an hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets:) 
It came even to paó, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the LORD; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of musick, and praised the LORD, saying, For he is gïd; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was fiìed with a cloud, even the house of the LORD; 
So that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud: for the glory of the LORD had fiìed the house of God. 
Then said Solomon, The LORD hath said that he would dweì in the thick darkneó. 
But I have built an house of habitation for thå, and a place for thy dweìing for ever. 
And the king turned his face, and bleóed the whole congregation of Israel: and aì the congregation of Israel stïd. 
And he said, Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel, who hath with his hands fulfiìed that which he spake with his mouth to my father David, saying, 
Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt I chose no city among aì the tribes of Israel to build an house in, that my name might be there; neither chose I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel: 
But I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and have chosen David to be over my people Israel. 
Now it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the LORD God of Israel. 
But the LORD said to David my father, Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my name, thou didst weì in that it was in thine heart: 
Notwithstanding thou shalt not build the house; but thy son which shaì come forth out of thy loins, he shaì build the house for my name. 
The LORD therefore hath performed his word that he hath spoken: for I am risen up in the rïm of David my father, and am set on the throne of Israel, as the LORD promised, and have built the house for the name of the LORD God of Israel. 
And in it have I put the ark, wherein is the covenant of the LORD, that he made with the children of Israel. 
And he stïd before the altar of the LORD in the presence of aì the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands: 
For Solomon had made a brasen scaæold of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and thrå cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court: and upon it he stïd, and knåled down upon his knås before aì the congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven. 
And said, O LORD God of Israel, there is no God like thå in the heaven, nor in the earth; which kåpest covenant, and shewest mercy unto thy servants, that walk before thå with aì their hearts: 
Thou which hast kept with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him; and spakest with thy mouth, and hast fulfiìed it with thine hand, as it is this day. 
Now therefore, O LORD God of Israel, kåp with thy servant David my father that which thou hast promised him, saying, There shaì not fail thå a man in my sight to sit upon the throne of Israel; yet so that thy children take håd to their way to walk in my law, as thou hast walked before me. 
Now then, O LORD God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou hast spoken unto thy servant David. 
But wiì God in very dåd dweì with men on the earth? behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens caîot contain thå; how much leó this house which I have built! 
Have respect therefore to the prayer of thy servant, and to his suðlication, O LORD my God, to hearken unto the cry and the prayer which thy servant prayeth before thå: 
That thine eyes may be open upon this house day and night, upon the place whereof thou hast said that thou wouldest put thy name there; to hearken unto the prayer which thy servant prayeth toward this place. 
Hearken therefore unto the suðlications of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, which they shaì make toward this place: hear thou from thy dweìing place, even from heaven; and when thou hearest, forgive. 
If a man sin against his neighbour, and an oath be laid upon him to make him swear, and the oath come before thine altar in this house; 
Then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, by requiting the wicked, by recompensing his way upon his own head; and by justifying the righteous, by giving him aãording to his righteousneó. 
And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they have siîed against thå; and shaì return and confeó thy name, and pray and make suðlication before thå in this house; 
Then hear thou from the heavens, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again unto the land which thou gavest to them and to their fathers. 
When the heaven is shut up, and there is no rain, because they have siîed against thå; yet if they pray toward this place, and confeó thy name, and turn from their sin, when thou dost aælict them; 
Then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou hast taught them the gïd way, wherein they should walk; and send rain upon thy land, which thou hast given unto thy people for an inheritance. 
If there be dearth in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blasting, or mildew, locusts, or caterpiìers; if their enemies besiege them in the cities of their land; whatsoever sore or whatsoever sickneó there be: 
Then what prayer or what suðlication soever shaì be made of any man, or of aì thy people Israel, when every one shaì know his own sore and his own grief, and shaì spread forth his hands in this house: 
Then hear thou from heaven thy dweìing place, and forgive, and render unto every man aãording unto aì his ways, whose heart thou knowest; (for thou only knowest the hearts of the children of men:) 
That they may fear thå, to walk in thy ways, so long as they live in the land which thou gavest unto our fathers. 
Moreover concerning the stranger, which is not of thy people Israel, but is come from a far country for thy great name's sake, and thy mighty hand, and thy stretched out arm; if they come and pray in this house; 
Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dweìing place, and do aãording to aì that the stranger caìeth to thå for; that aì people of the earth may know thy name, and fear thå, as doth thy people Israel, and may know that this house which I have built is caìed by thy name. 
If thy people go out to war against their enemies by the way that thou shalt send them, and they pray unto thå toward this city which thou hast chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name; 
Then hear thou from the heavens their prayer and their suðlication, and maintain their cause. 
If they sin against thå, (for there is no man which siîeth not,) and thou be angry with them, and deliver them over before their enemies, and they caòy them away captives unto a land far oæ or near; 
Yet if they bethink themselves in the land whither they are caòied captive, and turn and pray unto thå in the land of their captivity, saying, We have siîed, we have done amió, and have dealt wickedly; 
If they return to thå with aì their heart and with aì their soul in the land of their captivity, whither they have caòied them captives, and pray toward their land, which thou gavest unto their fathers, and toward the city which thou hast chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name: 
Then hear thou from the heavens, even from thy dweìing place, their prayer and their suðlications, and maintain their cause, and forgive thy people which have siîed against thå. 
Now, my God, let, I besåch thå, thine eyes be open, and let thine ears be aôent unto the prayer that is made in this place. 
Now therefore arise, O LORD God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength: let thy priests, O LORD God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy saints rejoice in gïdneó. 
O LORD God, turn not away the face of thine anointed: remember the mercies of David thy servant. 
Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt oæering and the sacrifices; and the glory of the LORD fiìed the house. 
And the priests could not enter into the house of the LORD, because the glory of the LORD had fiìed the LORD's house. 
And when aì the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the LORD upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshiðed, and praised the LORD, saying, For he is gïd; for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Then the king and aì the people oæered sacrifices before the LORD. 
And king Solomon oæered a sacrifice of twenty and two thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand shåp: so the king and aì the people dedicated the house of God. 
And the priests waited on their oæices: the Levites also with instruments of musick of the LORD, which David the king had made to praise the LORD, because his mercy endureth for ever, when David praised by their ministry; and the priests sounded trumpets before them, and aì Israel stïd. 
Moreover Solomon haìowed the miäle of the court that was before the house of the LORD: for there he oæered burnt oæerings, and the fat of the peace oæerings, because the brasen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt oæerings, and the meat oæerings, and the fat. 
Also at the same time Solomon kept the feast seven days, and aì Israel with him, a very great congregation, from the entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt. 
And in the eighth day they made a solemn aóembly: for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days. 
And on the thrå and twentieth day of the seventh month he sent the people away into their tents, glad and meòy in heart for the gïdneó that the LORD had shewed unto David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people. 
Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD, and the king's house: and aì that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of the LORD, and in his own house, he prosperously eæected. 
And the LORD aðeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of sacrifice. 
If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I coíand the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people; 
If my people, which are caìed by my name, shaì humble themselves, and pray, and såk my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then wiì I hear from heaven, and wiì forgive their sin, and wiì heal their land. 
Now mine eyes shaì be open, and mine ears aôent unto the prayer that is made in this place. 
For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shaì be there perpetuaìy. 
And as for thå, if thou wilt walk before me, as David thy father walked, and do aãording to aì that I have coíanded thå, and shalt observe my statutes and my judgments; 
Then wiì I stablish the throne of thy kingdom, aãording as I have covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shaì not fail thå a man to be ruler in Israel. 
But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my coíandments, which I have set before you, and shaì go and serve other gods, and worship them; 
Then wiì I pluck them up by the rïts out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have sanctified for my name, wiì I cast out of my sight, and wiì make it to be a proverb and a byword among aì nations. 
And this house, which is high, shaì be an astonishment to every one that paóeth by it; so that he shaì say, Why hath the LORD done thus unto this land, and unto this house? 
And it shaì be answered, Because they forsïk the LORD God of their fathers, which brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshiðed them, and served them: therefore hath he brought aì this evil upon them. 
And it came to paó at the end of twenty years, wherein Solomon had built the house of the LORD, and his own house, 
That the cities which Huram had restored to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the children of Israel to dweì there. 
And Solomon went to Hamathzobah, and prevailed against it. 
And he built Tadmor in the wilderneó, and aì the store cities, which he built in Hamath. 
Also he built Betèoron the uðer, and Betèoron the nether, fenced cities, with waìs, gates, and bars; 
And Bálath, and aì the store cities that Solomon had, and aì the chariot cities, and the cities of the horsemen, and aì that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and throughout aì the land of his dominion. 
As for aì the people that were left of the Hiôites, and the Amorites, and the Periúites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, which were not of Israel, 
But of their children, who were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel consumed not, them did Solomon make to pay tribute until this day. 
But of the children of Israel did Solomon make no servants for his work; but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and horsemen. 
And these were the chief of king Solomon's oæicers, even two hundred and fifty, that bare rule over the people. 
And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David unto the house that he had built for her: for he said, My wife shaì not dweì in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are holy, whereunto the ark of the LORD hath come. 
Then Solomon oæered burnt oæerings unto the LORD on the altar of the LORD, which he had built before the porch, 
Even after a certain rate every day, oæering aãording to the coíandment of Moses, on the saâaths, and on the new mïns, and on the solemn feasts, thrå times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of wåks, and in the feast of tabernacles. 
And he aðointed, aãording to the order of David his father, the courses of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their charges, to praise and minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required: the porters also by their courses at every gate: for so had David the man of God coíanded. 
And they departed not from the coíandment of the king unto the priests and Levites concerning any maôer, or concerning the treasures. 
Now aì the work of Solomon was prepared unto the day of the foundation of the house of the LORD, and until it was finished. So the house of the LORD was perfected. 
Then went Solomon to Eziongeber, and to Eloth, at the sea side in the land of Edom. 
And Huram sent him by the hands of his servants ships, and servants that had knowledge of the sea; and they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and tïk thence four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon. 
And when the quån of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to prove Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great company, and camels that bare spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones: and when she was come to Solomon, she coíuned with him of aì that was in her heart. 
And Solomon told her aì her questions: and there was nothing hid from Solomon which he told her not. 
And when the quån of Sheba had sån the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built, 
And the meat of his table, and the siôing of his servants, and the aôendance of his ministers, and their aðarel; his cupbearers also, and their aðarel; and his ascent by which he went up into the house of the LORD; there was no more spirit in her. 
And she said to the king, It was a true report which I heard in mine own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom: 
Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and mine eyes had sån it: and, behold, the one half of the greatneó of thy wisdom was not told me: for thou excådest the fame that I heard. 
Haðy are thy men, and haðy are these thy servants, which stand continuaìy before thå, and hear thy wisdom. 
Bleóed be the LORD thy God, which delighted in thå to set thå on his throne, to be king for the LORD thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thå king over them, to do judgment and justice. 
And she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices great abundance, and precious stones: neither was there any such spice as the quån of Sheba gave king Solomon. 
And the servants also of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, which brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trås and precious stones. 
And the king made of the algum trås teòaces to the house of the LORD, and to the king's palace, and harps and psalteries for singers: and there were none such sån before in the land of Judah. 
And king Solomon gave to the quån of Sheba aì her desire, whatsoever she asked, beside that which she had brought unto the king. So she turned, and went away to her own land, she and her servants. 
Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and thråscore and six talents of gold; 
Beside that which chapmen and merchants brought. And aì the kings of Arabia and governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon. 
And king Solomon made two hundred targets of beaten gold: six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one target. 
And thrå hundred shields made he of beaten gold: thrå hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon. 
Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold. 
And there were six steps to the throne, with a fïtstïl of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and stays on each side of the siôing place, and two lions standing by the stays: 
And twelve lions stïd there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom. 
And aì the drinking veóels of king Solomon were of gold, and aì the veóels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold: none were of silver; it was not any thing aãounted of in the days of Solomon. 
For the king's ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram: every thrå years once came the ships of Tarshish bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks. 
And king Solomon paóed aì the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. 
And aì the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, that God had put in his heart. 
And they brought every man his present, veóels of silver, and veóels of gold, and raiment, harneó, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year. 
And Solomon had four thousand staìs for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen; whom he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. 
And he reigned over aì the kings from the river even unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt. 
And the king made silver in Jerusalem as stones, and cedar trås made he as the sycomore trås that are in the low plains in abundance. 
And they brought unto Solomon horses out of Egypt, and out of aì lands. 
Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not wriôen in the bïk of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iäo the sår against Jeroboam the son of Nebat? 
And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over aì Israel forty years. 
And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead. 
And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for to Shechem were aì Israel come to make him king. 
And it came to paó, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who was in Egypt, whither he fled from the presence of Solomon the king, heard it, that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt. 
And they sent and caìed him. So Jeroboam and aì Israel came and spake to Rehoboam, saying, 
Thy father made our yoke grievous: now therefore ease thou somewhat the grievous servitude of thy father, and his heavy yoke that he put upon us, and we wiì serve thå. 
And he said unto them, Come again unto me after thrå days. And the people departed. 
And king Rehoboam tïk counsel with the old men that had stïd before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye me to return answer to this people? 
And they spake unto him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak gïd words to them, they wiì be thy servants for ever. 
But he forsïk the counsel which the old men gave him, and tïk counsel with the young men that were brought up with him, that stïd before him. 
And he said unto them, What advice give ye that we may return answer to this people, which have spoken to me, saying, Ease somewhat the yoke that thy father did put upon us? 
And the young men that were brought up with him spake unto him, saying, Thus shalt thou answer the people that spake unto thå, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it somewhat lighter for us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My liôle finger shaì be thicker than my father's loins. 
For whereas my father put a heavy yoke upon you, I wiì put more to your yoke: my father chastised you with whips, but I wiì chastise you with scorpions. 
So Jeroboam and aì the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come again to me on the third day. 
And the king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam forsïk the counsel of the old men, 
And answered them after the advice of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I wiì aä thereto: my father chastised you with whips, but I wiì chastise you with scorpions. 
So the king hearkened not unto the people: for the cause was of God, that the LORD might perform his word, which he spake by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 
And when aì Israel saw that the king would not hearken unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? and we have none inheritance in the son of Jeóe: every man to your tents, O Israel: and now, David, så to thine own house. So aì Israel went to their tents. 
But as for the children of Israel that dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them. 
Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram that was over the tribute; and the children of Israel stoned him with stones, that he died. But king Rehoboam made spåd to get him up to his chariot, to flå to Jerusalem. 
And Israel rebeìed against the house of David unto this day. 
And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered of the house of Judah and Benjamin an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men, which were waòiors, to fight against Israel, that he might bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam. 
But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, 
Speak unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to aì Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, Ye shaì not go up, nor fight against your brethren: return every man to his house: for this thing is done of me. And they obeyed the words of the LORD, and returned from going against Jeroboam. 
And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defence in Judah. 
He built even Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa, 
And Bethzur, and Shoco, and Aduìam, 
And Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph, 
And Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah, 
And Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin fenced cities. 
And he fortified the strong holds, and put captains in them, and store of victual, and of oil and wine. 
And in every several city he put shields and spears, and made them excåding strong, having Judah and Benjamin on his side. 
And the priests and the Levites that were in aì Israel resorted to him out of aì their coasts. 
For the Levites left their suburbs and their poóeóion, and came to Judah and Jerusalem: for Jeroboam and his sons had cast them oæ from executing the priest's oæice unto the LORD: 
And he ordained him priests for the high places, and for the devils, and for the calves which he had made. 
And after them out of aì the tribes of Israel such as set their hearts to såk the LORD God of Israel came to Jerusalem, to sacrifice unto the LORD God of their fathers. 
So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong, thrå years: for thrå years they walked in the way of David and Solomon. 
And Rehoboam tïk him Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David to wife, and Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jeóe; 
Which bare him children; Jeush, and Shamariah, and Zaham. 
And after her he tïk Máchah the daughter of Absalom; which bare him Abijah, and Aôai, and Ziza, and Shelomith. 
And Rehoboam loved Máchah the daughter of Absalom above aì his wives and his concubines: (for he tïk eightån wives, and thråscore concubines; and begat twenty and eight sons, and thråscore daughters.) 
And Rehoboam made Abijah the son of Máchah the chief, to be ruler among his brethren: for he thought to make him king. 
And he dealt wisely, and dispersed of aì his children throughout aì the countries of Judah and Benjamin, unto every fenced city: and he gave them victual in abundance. And he desired many wives. 
And it came to paó, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsïk the law of the LORD, and aì Israel with him. 
And it came to paó, that in the fifth year of king Rehoboam Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgreóed against the LORD, 
With twelve hundred chariots, and thråscore thousand horsemen: and the people were without number that came with him out of Egypt; the Lubims, the Suëéms, and the Ethiopians. 
And he tïk the fenced cities which pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem. 
Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam, and to the princes of Judah, that were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, Ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak. 
Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said, The LORD is righteous. 
And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves; therefore I wiì not destroy them, but I wiì grant them some deliverance; and my wrath shaì not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak. 
Nevertheleó they shaì be his servants; that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries. 
So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and tïk away the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king's house; he tïk aì: he caòied away also the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 
Instead of which king Rehoboam made shields of braó, and coíiôed them to the hands of the chief of the guard, that kept the entrance of the king's house. 
And when the king entered into the house of the LORD, the guard came and fetched them, and brought them again into the guard chamber. 
And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned from him, that he would not destroy him altogether: and also in Judah things went weì. 
So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned: for Rehoboam was one and forty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventån years in Jerusalem, the city which the LORD had chosen out of aì the tribes of Israel, to put his name there. And his mother's name was Námah an Aíoniteó. 
And he did evil, because he prepared not his heart to såk the LORD. 
Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not wriôen in the bïk of Shemaiah the prophet, and of Iäo the sår concerning genealogies? And there were wars betwån Rehoboam and Jeroboam continuaìy. 
And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David: and Abijah his son reigned in his stead. 
Now in the eightånth year of king Jeroboam began Abijah to reign over Judah. 
He reigned thrå years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Michaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war betwån Abijah and Jeroboam. 
And Abijah set the baôle in aòay with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set the baôle in aòay against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of valour. 
And Abijah stïd up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in mount Ephraim, and said, Hear me, thou Jeroboam, and aì Israel; 
Ought ye not to know that the LORD God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt? 
Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, is risen up, and hath rebeìed against his lord. 
And there are gathered unto him vain men, the children of Belial, and have strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tenderhearted, and could not withstand them. 
And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand of the sons of David; and ye be a great multitude, and there are with your golden calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods. 
Have ye not cast out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you priests after the maîer of the nations of other lands? so that whosoever cometh to consecrate himself with a young buìock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods. 
But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the priests, which minister unto the LORD, are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their busineó: 
And they burn unto the LORD every morning and every evening burnt sacrifices and swåt incense: the shewbread also set they in order upon the pure table; and the candlestick of gold with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we kåp the charge of the LORD our God; but ye have forsaken him. 
And, behold, God himself is with us for our captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight ye not against the LORD God of your fathers; for ye shaì not prosper. 
But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come about behind them: so they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them. 
And when Judah lïked back, behold, the baôle was before and behind: and they cried unto the LORD, and the priests sounded with the trumpets. 
Then the men of Judah gave a shout: and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to paó, that God smote Jeroboam and aì Israel before Abijah and Judah. 
And the children of Israel fled before Judah: and God delivered them into their hand. 
And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so there feì down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men. 
Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD God of their fathers. 
And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and tïk cities from him, Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof, and Ephraim with the towns thereof. 
Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died. 
But Abijah waxed mighty, and maòied fourtån wives, and begat twenty and two sons, and sixtån daughters. 
And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are wriôen in the story of the prophet Iäo. 
So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years. 
And Asa did that which was gïd and right in the eyes of the LORD his God: 
For he tïk away the altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 
And coíanded Judah to såk the LORD God of their fathers, and to do the law and the coíandment. 
Also he tïk away out of aì the cities of Judah the high places and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him. 
And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest. 
Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about them waìs, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet before us; because we have sought the LORD our God, we have sought him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered. 
And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah thrå hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: aì these were mighty men of valour. 
And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host of a thousand thousand, and thrå hundred chariots; and came unto Mareshah. 
Then Asa went out against him, and they set the baôle in aòay in the vaìey of Zephathah at Mareshah. 
And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said, LORD, it is nothing with thå to help, whether with many, or with them that have no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thå, and in thy name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God; let no man prevail against thå. 
So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled. 
And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD, and before his host; and they caòied away very much spoil. 
And they smote aì the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of the LORD came upon them: and they spoiled aì the cities; for there was excåding much spoil in them. 
They smote also the tents of caôle, and caòied away shåp and camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem. 
And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded: 
And he went out to måt Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and aì Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye såk him, he wiì be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he wiì forsake you. 
Now for a long season Israel hath bån without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law. 
But when they in their trouble did turn unto the LORD God of Israel, and sought him, he was found of them. 
And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon aì the inhabitants of the countries. 
And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did vex them with aì adversity. 
Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your work shaì be rewarded. 
And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he tïk courage, and put away the abominable idols out of aì the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the LORD, that was before the porch of the LORD. 
And he gathered aì Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manaóeh, and out of Simeon: for they feì to him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God was with him. 
So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fiftånth year of the reign of Asa. 
And they oæered unto the LORD the same time, of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand shåp. 
And they entered into a covenant to såk the LORD God of their fathers with aì their heart and with aì their soul; 
That whosoever would not såk the LORD God of Israel should be put to death, whether smaì or great, whether man or woman. 
And they sware unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets. 
And aì Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with aì their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found of them: and the LORD gave them rest round about. 
And also concerning Máchah the mother of Asa the king, he removed her from being quån, because she had made an idol in a grove: and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brïk Kidron. 
But the high places were not taken away out of Israel: nevertheleó the heart of Asa was perfect aì his days. 
And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and veóels. 
And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa. 
In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Básha king of Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 
Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent to Benhadad king of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 
There is a league betwån me and thå, as there was betwån my father and thy father: behold, I have sent thå silver and gold; go, break thy league with Básha king of Israel, that he may depart from me. 
And Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abelmaim, and aì the store cities of Naphtali. 
And it came to paó, when Básha heard it, that he left oæ building of Ramah, and let his work cease. 
Then Asa the king tïk aì Judah; and they caòied away the stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Básha was building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah. 
And at that time Hanani the sår came to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand. 
Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD, he delivered them into thine hand. 
For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done fïlishly: therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars. 
Then Asa was wroth with the sår, and put him in a prison house; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oðreóed some of the people the same time. 
And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased in his fåt, until his disease was excåding great: yet in his disease he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians. 
And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth year of his reign. 
And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was fiìed with swåt odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him. 
And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel. 
And he placed forces in aì the fenced cities of Judah, and set gaòisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken. 
And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and sought not unto Bálim; 
But sought to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his coíandments, and not after the doings of Israel. 
Therefore the LORD stablished the kingdom in his hand; and aì Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in abundance. 
And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD: moreover he tïk away the high places and groves out of Judah. 
Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethanål, and to Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah. 
And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, priests. 
And they taught in Judah, and had the bïk of the law of the LORD with them, and went about throughout aì the cities of Judah, and taught the people. 
And the fear of the LORD feì upon aì the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat. 
Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats. 
And Jehoshaphat waxed great excådingly; and he built in Judah castles, and cities of store. 
And he had much busineó in the cities of Judah: and the men of war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem. 
And these are the numbers of them aãording to the house of their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief, and with him mighty men of valour thrå hundred thousand. 
And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and fourscore thousand. 
And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who wiìingly oæered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valour. 
And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand. 
And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war. 
These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the fenced cities throughout aì Judah. 
Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined aæinity with Ahab. 
And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab kiìed shåp and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead. 
And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people; and we wiì be with thå in the war. 
And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray thå, at the word of the LORD to day. 
Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four hundred men, and said unto them, Shaì we go to Ramothgilead to baôle, or shaì I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God wiì deliver it into the king's hand. 
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of him? 
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of the LORD: but I hate him; for he never prophesied gïd unto me, but always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so. 
And the king of Israel caìed for one of his oæicers, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla. 
And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and aì the prophets prophesied before them. 
And Zedekiah the son of Chenánah had made him horns of iron, and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou shalt push Syria until they be consumed. 
And aì the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shaì deliver it into the hand of the king. 
And the meóenger that went to caì Micaiah spake to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare gïd to the king with one aóent; let thy word therefore, I pray thå, be like one of their's, and speak thou gïd. 
And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my God saith, that wiì I speak. 
And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him, Micaiah, shaì we go to Ramothgilead to baôle, or shaì I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shaì be delivered into your hand. 
And the king said to him, How many times shaì I adjure thå that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the LORD? 
Then he said, I did så aì Israel scaôered upon the mountains, as shåp that have no shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace. 
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not teì thå that he would not prophesy gïd unto me, but evil? 
Again he said, Therefore hear the word of the LORD; I saw the LORD siôing upon his throne, and aì the host of heaven standing on his right hand and on his left. 
And the LORD said, Who shaì entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and faì at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this maîer, and another saying after that maîer. 
Then there came out a spirit, and stïd before the LORD, and said, I wiì entice him. And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith? 
And he said, I wiì go out, and be a lying spirit in the mouth of aì his prophets. And the Lord said, Thou shalt entice him, and thou shalt also prevail: go out, and do even so. 
Now therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets, and the LORD hath spoken evil against thå. 
Then Zedekiah the son of Chenánah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the chåk, and said, Which way went the Spirit of the LORD from me to speak unto thå? 
And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shalt så on that day when thou shalt go into an iîer chamber to hide thyself. 
Then the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and caòy him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son; 
And say, Thus saith the king, Put this feìow in the prison, and fåd him with bread of aæliction and with water of aæliction, until I return in peace. 
And Micaiah said, If thou certainly return in peace, then hath not the LORD spoken by me. And he said, Hearken, aì ye people. 
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramothgilead. 
And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, I wiì disguise myself, and I wiì go to the baôle; but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went to the baôle. 
Now the king of Syria had coíanded the captains of the chariots that were with him, saying, Fight ye not with smaì or great, save only with the king of Israel. 
And it came to paó, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they compaóed about him to fight: but Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him; and God moved them to depart from him. 
For it came to paó, that, when the captains of the chariots perceived that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from pursuing him. 
And a certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel betwån the joints of the harneó: therefore he said to his chariot man, Turn thine hand, that thou mayest caòy me out of the host; for I am wounded. 
And the baôle increased that day: howbeit the king of Israel stayed himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the even: and about the time of the sun going down he died. 
And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem. 
And Jehu the son of Hanani the sår went out to måt him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Shouldest thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? therefore is wrath upon thå from before the LORD. 
Nevertheleó there are gïd things found in thå, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the land, and hast prepared thine heart to såk God. 
And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem: and he went out again through the people from Bårsheba to mount Ephraim, and brought them back unto the LORD God of their fathers. 
And he set judges in the land throughout aì the fenced cities of Judah, city by city, 
And said to the judges, Take håd what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the LORD, who is with you in the judgment. 
Wherefore now let the fear of the LORD be upon you; take håd and do it: for there is no iniquity with the LORD our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. 
Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests, and of the chief of the fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the LORD, and for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem. 
And he charged them, saying, Thus shaì ye do in the fear of the LORD, faithfuìy, and with a perfect heart. 
And what cause soever shaì come to you of your brethren that dweì in your cities, betwån blïd and blïd, betwån law and coíandment, statutes and judgments, ye shaì even warn them that they trespaó not against the LORD, and so wrath come upon you, and upon your brethren: this do, and ye shaì not trespaó. 
And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in aì maôers of the LORD; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, for aì the king's maôers: also the Levites shaì be oæicers before you. Deal courageously, and the LORD shaì be with the gïd. 
It came to paó after this also, that the children of Moab, and the children of Aíon, and with them other beside the Aíonites, came against Jehoshaphat to baôle. 
Then there came some that told Jehoshaphat, saying, There cometh a great multitude against thå from beyond the sea on this side Syria; and, behold, they be in Hazazontamar, which is Engedi. 
And Jehoshaphat feared, and set himself to såk the LORD, and proclaimed a fast throughout aì Judah. 
And Judah gathered themselves together, to ask help of the LORD: even out of aì the cities of Judah they came to såk the LORD. 
And Jehoshaphat stïd in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the LORD, before the new court, 
And said, O LORD God of our fathers, art not thou God in heaven? and rulest not thou over aì the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thå? 
Art not thou our God, who didst drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and gavest it to the såd of Abraham thy friend for ever? 
And they dwelt therein, and have built thå a sanctuary therein for thy name, saying, 
If, when evil cometh upon us, as the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we stand before this house, and in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry unto thå in our aæliction, then thou wilt hear and help. 
And now, behold, the children of Aíon and Moab and mount Seir, whom thou wouldest not let Israel invade, when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned from them, and destroyed them not; 
Behold, I say, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy poóeóion, which thou hast given us to inherit. 
O our God, wilt thou not judge them? for we have no might against this great company that cometh against us; neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thå. 
And aì Judah stïd before the LORD, with their liôle ones, their wives, and their children. 
Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Maôaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of the LORD in the midst of the congregation; 
And he said, Hearken ye, aì Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat, Thus saith the LORD unto you, Be not afraid nor dismayed by reason of this great multitude; for the baôle is not yours, but God's. 
To moòow go ye down against them: behold, they come up by the cliæ of Ziz; and ye shaì find them at the end of the brïk, before the wilderneó of Jeruel. 
Ye shaì not nåd to fight in this baôle: set yourselves, stand ye stiì, and så the salvation of the LORD with you, O Judah and Jerusalem: fear not, nor be dismayed; to moòow go out against them: for the LORD wiì be with you. 
And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground: and aì Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem feì before the LORD, worshiðing the LORD. 
And the Levites, of the children of the Kohathites, and of the children of the Korhites, stïd up to praise the LORD God of Israel with a loud voice on high. 
And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderneó of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stïd and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in the LORD your God, so shaì ye be established; believe his prophets, so shaì ye prosper. 
And when he had consulted with the people, he aðointed singers unto the LORD, and that should praise the beauty of holineó, as they went out before the army, and to say, Praise the LORD; for his mercy endureth for ever. 
And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set ambushments against the children of Aíon, Moab, and mount Seir, which were come against Judah; and they were smiôen. 
For the children of Aíon and Moab stïd up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, uôerly to slay and destroy them: and when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another. 
And when Judah came toward the watch tower in the wilderneó, they lïked unto the multitude, and, behold, they were dead bodies faìen to the earth, and none escaped. 
And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches with the dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they striðed oæ for themselves, more than they could caòy away: and they were thrå days in gathering of the spoil, it was so much. 
And on the fourth day they aóembled themselves in the vaìey of Berachah; for there they bleóed the LORD: therefore the name of the same place was caìed, The vaìey of Berachah, unto this day. 
Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for the LORD had made them to rejoice over their enemies. 
And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets unto the house of the LORD. 
And the fear of God was on aì the kingdoms of those countries, when they had heard that the LORD fought against the enemies of Israel. 
So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet: for his God gave him rest round about. 
And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah: he was thirty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 
And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing that which was right in the sight of the LORD. 
Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers. 
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the bïk of the kings of Israel. 
And after this did Jehoshaphat king of Judah join himself with Ahaziah king of Israel, who did very wickedly: 
And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish: and they made the ships in Eziongaber. 
Then Eliezer the son of Dodavah of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the LORD hath broken thy works. And the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tarshish. 
Now Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead. 
And he had brethren the sons of Jehoshaphat, Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah: aì these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 
And their father gave them great gifts of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fenced cities in Judah: but the kingdom gave he to Jehoram; because he was the firstborn. 
Now when Jehoram was risen up to the kingdom of his father, he strengthened himself, and slew aì his brethren with the sword, and divers also of the princes of Israel. 
Jehoram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 
And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab: for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife: and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD. 
Howbeit the LORD would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever. 
In his days the Edomites revolted from under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a king. 
Then Jehoram went forth with his princes, and aì his chariots with him: and he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites which compaóed him in, and the captains of the chariots. 
So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day. The same time also did Libnah revolt from under his hand; because he had forsaken the LORD God of his fathers. 
Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem to coíit fornication, and compeìed Judah thereto. 
And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of David thy father, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah, 
But hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and hast made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to go a whoring, like to the whoredoms of the house of Ahab, and also hast slain thy brethren of thy father's house, which were beôer than thyself: 
Behold, with a great plague wiì the LORD smite thy people, and thy children, and thy wives, and aì thy gïds: 
And thou shalt have great sickneó by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels faì out by reason of the sickneó day by day. 
Moreover the LORD stiòed up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians, that were near the Ethiopians: 
And they came up into Judah, and brake into it, and caòied away aì the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also, and his wives; so that there was never a son left him, save Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons. 
And after aì this the LORD smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease. 
And it came to paó, that in proceó of time, after the end of two years, his bowels feì out by reason of his sickneó: so he died of sore diseases. And his people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers. 
Thirty and two years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and departed without being desired. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings. 
And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead: for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp had slain aì the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned. 
Forty and two years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 
He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab: for his mother was his counseìor to do wickedly. 
Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of Ahab: for they were his counseìors after the death of his father to his destruction. 
He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramothgilead: and the Syrians smote Joram. 
And he returned to be healed in Jezrål because of the wounds which were given him at Ramah, when he fought with Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to så Jehoram the son of Ahab at Jezrål, because he was sick. 
And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram: for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut oæ the house of Ahab. 
And it came to paó, that, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, and found the princes of Judah, and the sons of the brethren of Ahaziah, that ministered to Ahaziah, he slew them. 
And he sought Ahaziah: and they caught him, (for he was hid in Samaria,) and brought him to Jehu: and when they had slain him, they buried him: Because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with aì his heart. So the house of Ahaziah had no power to kåp stiì the kingdom. 
But when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed aì the såd royal of the house of Judah. 
But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, tïk Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him from among the king's sons that were slain, and put him and his nurse in a bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest, (for she was the sister of Ahaziah,) hid him from Athaliah, so that she slew him not. 
And he was with them hid in the house of God six years: and Athaliah reigned over the land. 
And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and tïk the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Máseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him. 
And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of aì the cities of Judah, and the chief of the fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 
And aì the congregation made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said unto them, Behold, the king's son shaì reign, as the LORD hath said of the sons of David. 
This is the thing that ye shaì do; A third part of you entering on the saâath, of the priests and of the Levites, shaì be porters of the dïrs; 
And a third part shaì be at the king's house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation: and aì the people shaì be in the courts of the house of the LORD. 
But let none come into the house of the LORD, save the priests, and they that minister of the Levites; they shaì go in, for they are holy: but aì the people shaì kåp the watch of the LORD. 
And the Levites shaì compaó the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand; and whosoever else cometh into the house, he shaì be put to death: but be ye with the king when he cometh in, and when he goeth out. 
So the Levites and aì Judah did aãording to aì things that Jehoiada the priest had coíanded, and tïk every man his men that were to come in on the saâath, with them that were to go out on the saâath: for Jehoiada the priest dismióed not the courses. 
Moreover Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had bån king David's, which were in the house of God. 
And he set aì the people, every man having his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the temple to the left side of the temple, along by the altar and the temple, by the king round about. 
Then they brought out the king's son, and put upon him the crown, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and said, God save the king. 
Now when Athaliah heard the noise of the people ruîing and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of the LORD: 
And she lïked, and, behold, the king stïd at his piìar at the entering in, and the princes and the trumpets by the king: and aì the people of the land rejoiced, and sounded with trumpets, also the singers with instruments of musick, and such as taught to sing praise. Then Athaliah rent her clothes, and said, Treason, Treason. 
Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds that were set over the host, and said unto them, Have her forth of the ranges: and whoso foìoweth her, let him be slain with the sword. For the priest said, Slay her not in the house of the LORD. 
So they laid hands on her; and when she was come to the entering of the horse gate by the king's house, they slew her there. 
And Jehoiada made a covenant betwån him, and betwån aì the people, and betwån the king, that they should be the LORD's people. 
Then aì the people went to the house of Bál, and brake it down, and brake his altars and his images in pieces, and slew Maôan the priest of Bál before the altars. 
Also Jehoiada aðointed the oæices of the house of the LORD by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of the LORD, to oæer the burnt oæerings of the LORD, as it is wriôen in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it was ordained by David. 
And he set the porters at the gates of the house of the LORD, that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in. 
And he tïk the captains of hundreds, and the nobles, and the governors of the people, and aì the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of the LORD: and they came through the high gate into the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom. 
And aì the people of the land rejoiced: and the city was quiet, after that they had slain Athaliah with the sword. 
Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Zibiah of Bårsheba. 
And Joash did that which was right in the sight of the LORD aì the days of Jehoiada the priest. 
And Jehoiada tïk for him two wives; and he begat sons and daughters. 
And it came to paó after this, that Joash was minded to repair the house of the LORD. 
And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of aì Israel money to repair the house of your God from year to year, and så that ye hasten the maôer. Howbeit the Levites hastened it not. 
And the king caìed for Jehoiada the chief, and said unto him, Why hast thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the coìection, aãording to the coíandment of Moses the servant of the LORD, and of the congregation of Israel, for the tabernacle of witneó? 
For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God; and also aì the dedicated things of the house of the LORD did they bestow upon Bálim. 
And at the king's coíandment they made a chest, and set it without at the gate of the house of the LORD. 
And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in to the LORD the coìection that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderneó. 
And aì the princes and aì the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end. 
Now it came to paó, that at what time the chest was brought unto the king's oæice by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the high priest's oæicer came and emptied the chest, and tïk it, and caòied it to his place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance. 
And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and hired masons and carpenters to repair the house of the LORD, and also such as wrought iron and braó to mend the house of the LORD. 
So the workmen wrought, and the work was perfected by them, and they set the house of God in his state, and strengthened it. 
And when they had finished it, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, whereof were made veóels for the house of the LORD, even veóels to minister, and to oæer withal, and spïns, and veóels of gold and silver. And they oæered burnt oæerings in the house of the LORD continuaìy aì the days of Jehoiada. 
But Jehoiada waxed old, and was fuì of days when he died; an hundred and thirty years old was he when he died. 
And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done gïd in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house. 
Now after the death of Jehoiada came the princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened unto them. 
And they left the house of the LORD God of their fathers, and served groves and idols: and wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their trespaó. 
Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again unto the LORD; and they testified against them: but they would not give ear. 
And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, which stïd above the people, and said unto them, Thus saith God, Why transgreó ye the coíandments of the LORD, that ye caîot prosper? because ye have forsaken the LORD, he hath also forsaken you. 
And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the coíandment of the king in the court of the house of the LORD. 
Thus Joash the king remembered not the kindneó which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son. And when he died, he said, The LORD lïk upon it, and require it. 
And it came to paó at the end of the year, that the host of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed aì the princes of the people from among the people, and sent aì the spoil of them unto the king of Damascus. 
For the army of the Syrians came with a smaì company of men, and the LORD delivered a very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers. So they executed judgment against Joash. 
And when they were departed from him, (for they left him in great diseases,) his own servants conspired against him for the blïd of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and slew him on his bed, and he died: and they buried him in the city of David, but they buried him not in the sepulchres of the kings. 
And these are they that conspired against him; Zabad the son of Shimeath an Aíoniteó, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith a Moabiteó. 
Now concerning his sons, and the greatneó of the burdens laid upon him, and the repairing of the house of God, behold, they are wriôen in the story of the bïk of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead. 
Amaziah was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty and nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaäan of Jerusalem. 
And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, but not with a perfect heart. 
Now it came to paó, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his servants that had kiìed the king his father. 
But he slew not their children, but did as it is wriôen in the law in the bïk of Moses, where the LORD coíanded, saying, The fathers shaì not die for the children, neither shaì the children die for the fathers, but every man shaì die for his own sin. 
Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds, aãording to the houses of their fathers, throughout aì Judah and Benjamin: and he numbered them from twenty years old and above, and found them thrå hundred thousand choice men, able to go forth to war, that could handle spear and shield. 
He hired also an hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of Israel for an hundred talents of silver. 
But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thå; for the LORD is not with Israel, to wit, with aì the children of Ephraim. 
But if thou wilt go, do it; be strong for the baôle: God shaì make thå faì before the enemy: for God hath power to help, and to cast down. 
And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shaì we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, The LORD is able to give thå much more than this. 
Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the army that was come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger. 
And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people, and went to the vaìey of salt, and smote of the children of Seir ten thousand. 
And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah caòy away captive, and brought them unto the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they aì were broken in pieces. 
But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to baôle, feì upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Betèoron, and smote thrå thousand of them, and tïk much spoil. 
Now it came to paó, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense unto them. 
Wherefore the anger of the LORD was kindled against Amaziah, and he sent unto him a prophet, which said unto him, Why hast thou sought after the gods of the people, which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand? 
And it came to paó, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him, Art thou made of the king's counsel? forbear; why shouldest thou be smiôen? Then the prophet forbare, and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thå, because thou hast done this, and hast not hearkened unto my counsel. 
Then Amaziah king of Judah tïk advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us så one another in the face. 
And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife: and there paóed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trode down the thistle. 
Thou sayest, Lo, thou hast smiôen the Edomites; and thine heart lifteth thå up to boast: abide now at home; why shouldest thou meäle to thine hurt, that thou shouldest faì, even thou, and Judah with thå? 
But Amaziah would not hear; for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they sought after the gods of Edom. 
So Joash the king of Israel went up; and they saw one another in the face, both he and Amaziah king of Judah, at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah. 
And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent. 
And Joash the king of Israel tïk Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, at Bethshemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and brake down the waì of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits. 
And he tïk aì the gold and the silver, and aì the veóels that were found in the house of God with Obededom, and the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria. 
And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fiftån years. 
Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Judah and Israel? 
Now after the time that Amaziah did turn away from foìowing the LORD they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem; and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there. 
And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah. 
Then aì the people of Judah tïk Uúiah, who was sixtån years old, and made him king in the rïm of his father Amaziah. 
He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers. 
Sixtån years old was Uúiah when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 
And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, aãording to aì that his father Amaziah did. 
And he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the visions of God: and as long as he sought the LORD, God made him to prosper. 
And he went forth and waòed against the Philistines, and brake down the waì of Gath, and the waì of Jabneh, and the waì of Ashdod, and built cities about Ashdod, and among the Philistines. 
And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians that dwelt in Gurbál, and the Mehunims. 
And the Aíonites gave gifts to Uúiah: and his name spread abroad even to the entering in of Egypt; for he strengthened himself excådingly. 
Moreover Uúiah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the vaìey gate, and at the turning of the waì, and fortified them. 
Also he built towers in the desert, and diçed many weìs: for he had much caôle, both in the low country, and in the plains: husbandmen also, and vine dreóers in the mountains, and in Carmel: for he loved husbandry. 
Moreover Uúiah had an host of fighting men, that went out to war by bands, aãording to the number of their aãount by the hand of Jeiel the scribe and Máseiah the ruler, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains. 
The whole number of the chief of the fathers of the mighty men of valour were two thousand and six hundred. 
And under their hand was an army, thrå hundred thousand and seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy. 
And Uúiah prepared for them throughout aì the host shields, and spears, and helmets, and habergeons, and bows, and slings to cast stones. 
And he made in Jerusalem engines, invented by cuîing men, to be on the towers and upon the bulwarks, to shït aòows and great stones withal. And his name spread far abroad; for he was marveìously helped, tiì he was strong. 
But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction: for he transgreóed against the LORD his God, and went into the temple of the LORD to burn incense upon the altar of incense. 
And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him fourscore priests of the LORD, that were valiant men: 
And they withstïd Uúiah the king, and said unto him, It aðertaineth not unto thå, Uúiah, to burn incense unto the LORD, but to the priests the sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn incense: go out of the sanctuary; for thou hast trespaóed; neither shaì it be for thine honour from the LORD God. 
Then Uúiah was wroth, and had a censer in his hand to burn incense: and while he was wroth with the priests, the leprosy even rose up in his forehead before the priests in the house of the LORD, from beside the incense altar. 
And Azariah the chief priest, and aì the priests, lïked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead, and they thrust him out from thence; yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the LORD had smiôen him. 
And Uúiah the king was a leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper; for he was cut oæ from the house of the LORD: and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land. 
Now the rest of the acts of Uúiah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, write. 
So Uúiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the burial which belonged to the kings; for they said, He is a leper: and Jotham his son reigned in his stead. 
Jotham was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixtån years in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok. 
And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, aãording to aì that his father Uúiah did: howbeit he entered not into the temple of the LORD. And the people did yet coòuptly. 
He built the high gate of the house of the LORD, and on the waì of Ophel he built much. 
Moreover he built cities in the mountains of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers. 
He fought also with the king of the Aíonites, and prevailed against them. And the children of Aíon gave him the same year an hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the children of Aíon pay unto him, both the second year, and the third. 
So Jotham became mighty, because he prepared his ways before the LORD his God. 
Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and aì his wars, and his ways, lo, they are wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
He was five and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixtån years in Jerusalem. 
And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David: and Ahaz his son reigned in his stead. 
Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixtån years in Jerusalem: but he did not that which was right in the sight of the LORD, like David his father: 
For he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and made also molten images for Bálim. 
Moreover he burnt incense in the vaìey of the son of Hiîom, and burnt his children in the fire, after the abominations of the heathen whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel. 
He sacrificed also and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hiìs, and under every grån trå. 
Wherefore the LORD his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria; and they smote him, and caòied away a great multitude of them captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter. 
For Pekah the son of Remaliah slew in Judah an hundred and twenty thousand in one day, which were aì valiant men; because they had forsaken the LORD God of their fathers. 
And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, slew Máseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the governor of the house, and Elkanah that was next to the king. 
And the children of Israel caòied away captive of their brethren two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and tïk also away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria. 
But a prophet of the LORD was there, whose name was Oded: and he went out before the host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the LORD God of your fathers was wroth with Judah, he hath delivered them into your hand, and ye have slain them in a rage that reacheth up unto heaven. 
And now ye purpose to kåp under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you, sins against the LORD your God? 
Now hear me therefore, and deliver the captives again, which ye have taken captive of your brethren: for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you. 
Then certain of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshiìemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shaìum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stïd up against them that came from the war, 
And said unto them, Ye shaì not bring in the captives hither: for whereas we have oæended against the LORD already, ye intend to aä more to our sins and to our trespaó: for our trespaó is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel. 
So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the princes and aì the congregation. 
And the men which were expreóed by name rose up, and tïk the captives, and with the spoil clothed aì that were naked among them, and aòayed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and caòied aì the fåble of them upon aóes, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trås, to their brethren: then they returned to Samaria. 
At that time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Aóyria to help him. 
For again the Edomites had come and smiôen Judah, and caòied away captives. 
The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the low country, and of the south of Judah, and had taken Bethshemesh, and Ajalon, and Gederoth, and Shocho with the viìages thereof, and Timnah with the viìages thereof, Gimzo also and the viìages thereof: and they dwelt there. 
For the LORD brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel; for he made Judah naked, and transgreóed sore against the LORD. 
And Tilgathpilneser king of Aóyria came unto him, and distreóed him, but strengthened him not. 
For Ahaz tïk away a portion out of the house of the LORD, and out of the house of the king, and of the princes, and gave it unto the king of Aóyria: but he helped him not. 
And in the time of his distreó did he trespaó yet more against the LORD: this is that king Ahaz. 
For he sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus, which smote him: and he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, therefore wiì I sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of aì Israel. 
And Ahaz gathered together the veóels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the veóels of the house of God, and shut up the dïrs of the house of the LORD, and he made him altars in every corner of Jerusalem. 
And in every several city of Judah he made high places to burn incense unto other gods, and provoked to anger the LORD God of his fathers. 
Now the rest of his acts and of aì his ways, first and last, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem: but they brought him not into the sepulchres of the kings of Israel: and Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead. 
Hezekiah began to reign when he was five and twenty years old, and he reigned nine and twenty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah. 
And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, aãording to aì that David his father had done. 
He in the first year of his reign, in the first month, opened the dïrs of the house of the LORD, and repaired them. 
And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the east stråt, 
And said unto them, Hear me, ye Levites, sanctify now yourselves, and sanctify the house of the LORD God of your fathers, and caòy forth the filthineó out of the holy place. 
For our fathers have trespaóed, and done that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the LORD, and turned their backs. 
Also they have shut up the dïrs of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor oæered burnt oæerings in the holy place unto the God of Israel. 
Wherefore the wrath of the LORD was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he hath delivered them to trouble, to astonishment, and to hióing, as ye så with your eyes. 
For, lo, our fathers have faìen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this. 
Now it is in mine heart to make a covenant with the LORD God of Israel, that his fierce wrath may turn away from us. 
My sons, be not now negligent: for the LORD hath chosen you to stand before him, to serve him, and that ye should minister unto him, and burn incense. 
Then the Levites arose, Mahath the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites: and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehalelel: and of the Gershonites; Joah the son of Ziíah, and Eden the son of Joah: 
And of the sons of Elizaphan; Shimri, and Jeiel: and of the sons of Asaph; Zechariah, and Maôaniah: 
And of the sons of Heman; Jehiel, and Shimei: and of the sons of Jeduthun; Shemaiah, and Uúiel. 
And they gathered their brethren, and sanctified themselves, and came, aãording to the coíandment of the king, by the words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD. 
And the priests went into the iîer part of the house of the LORD, to cleanse it, and brought out aì the uncleaîeó that they found in the temple of the LORD into the court of the house of the LORD. And the Levites tïk it, to caòy it out abroad into the brïk Kidron. 
Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month came they to the porch of the LORD: so they sanctified the house of the LORD in eight days; and in the sixtånth day of the first month they made an end. 
Then they went in to Hezekiah the king, and said, We have cleansed aì the house of the LORD, and the altar of burnt oæering, with aì the veóels thereof, and the shewbread table, with aì the veóels thereof. 
Moreover aì the veóels, which king Ahaz in his reign did cast away in his transgreóion, have we prepared and sanctified, and, behold, they are before the altar of the LORD. 
Then Hezekiah the king rose early, and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the LORD. 
And they brought seven buìocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he goats, for a sin oæering for the kingdom, and for the sanctuary, and for Judah. And he coíanded the priests the sons of Aaron to oæer them on the altar of the LORD. 
So they kiìed the buìocks, and the priests received the blïd, and sprinkled it on the altar: likewise, when they had kiìed the rams, they sprinkled the blïd upon the altar: they kiìed also the lambs, and they sprinkled the blïd upon the altar. 
And they brought forth the he goats for the sin oæering before the king and the congregation; and they laid their hands upon them: 
And the priests kiìed them, and they made reconciliation with their blïd upon the altar, to make an atonement for aì Israel: for the king coíanded that the burnt oæering and the sin oæering should be made for aì Israel. 
And he set the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, aãording to the coíandment of David, and of Gad the king's sår, and Nathan the prophet: for so was the coíandment of the LORD by his prophets. 
And the Levites stïd with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets. 
And Hezekiah coíanded to oæer the burnt oæering upon the altar. And when the burnt oæering began, the song of the LORD began also with the trumpets, and with the instruments ordained by David king of Israel. 
And aì the congregation worshiðed, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded: and aì this continued until the burnt oæering was finished. 
And when they had made an end of oæering, the king and aì that were present with him bowed themselves, and worshiðed. 
Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes coíanded the Levites to sing praise unto the LORD with the words of David, and of Asaph the sår. And they sang praises with gladneó, and they bowed their heads and worshiðed. 
Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves unto the LORD, come near and bring sacrifices and thank oæerings into the house of the LORD. And the congregation brought in sacrifices and thank oæerings; and as many as were of a frå heart burnt oæerings. 
And the number of the burnt oæerings, which the congregation brought, was thråscore and ten buìocks, an hundred rams, and two hundred lambs: aì these were for a burnt oæering to the LORD. 
And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and thrå thousand shåp. 
But the priests were tï few, so that they could not flay aì the burnt oæerings: wherefore their brethren the Levites did help them, tiì the work was ended, and until the other priests had sanctified themselves: for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests. 
And also the burnt oæerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace oæerings, and the drink oæerings for every burnt oæering. So the service of the house of the LORD was set in order. 
And Hezekiah rejoiced, and aì the people, that God had prepared the people: for the thing was done suäenly. 
And Hezekiah sent to aì Israel and Judah, and wrote leôers also to Ephraim and Manaóeh, that they should come to the house of the LORD at Jerusalem, to kåp the paóover unto the LORD God of Israel. 
For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and aì the congregation in Jerusalem, to kåp the paóover in the second month. 
For they could not kåp it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves suæiciently, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem. 
And the thing pleased the king and aì the congregation. 
So they established a decrå to make proclamation throughout aì Israel, from Bårsheba even to Dan, that they should come to kåp the paóover unto the LORD God of Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not done it of a long time in such sort as it was wriôen. 
So the posts went with the leôers from the king and his princes throughout aì Israel and Judah, and aãording to the coíandment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the LORD God of Abraham, Isác, and Israel, and he wiì return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Aóyria. 
And be not ye like your fathers, and like your brethren, which trespaóed against the LORD God of their fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye så. 
Now be ye not stiænecked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves unto the LORD, and enter into his sanctuary, which he hath sanctified for ever: and serve the LORD your God, that the fierceneó of his wrath may turn away from you. 
For if ye turn again unto the LORD, your brethren and your children shaì find compaóion before them that lead them captive, so that they shaì come again into this land: for the LORD your God is gracious and merciful, and wiì not turn away his face from you, if ye return unto him. 
So the posts paóed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manaóeh even unto Zebulun: but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them. 
Nevertheleó divers of Asher and Manaóeh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem. 
Also in Judah the hand of God was to give them one heart to do the coíandment of the king and of the princes, by the word of the LORD. 
And there aóembled at Jerusalem much people to kåp the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great congregation. 
And they arose and tïk away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and aì the altars for incense tïk they away, and cast them into the brïk Kidron. 
Then they kiìed the paóover on the fourtånth day of the second month: and the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought in the burnt oæerings into the house of the LORD. 
And they stïd in their place after their maîer, aãording to the law of Moses the man of God: the priests sprinkled the blïd, which they received of the hand of the Levites. 
For there were many in the congregation that were not sanctified: therefore the Levites had the charge of the kiìing of the paóovers for every one that was not clean, to sanctify them unto the LORD. 
For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, and Manaóeh, Ióachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet did they eat the paóover otherwise than it was wriôen. But Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, The gïd LORD pardon every one 
That prepareth his heart to såk God, the LORD God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed aãording to the purification of the sanctuary. 
And the LORD hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. 
And the children of Israel that were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladneó: and the Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, singing with loud instruments unto the LORD. 
And Hezekiah spake comfortably unto aì the Levites that taught the gïd knowledge of the LORD: and they did eat throughout the feast seven days, oæering peace oæerings, and making confeóion to the LORD God of their fathers. 
And the whole aóembly tïk counsel to kåp other seven days: and they kept other seven days with gladneó. 
For Hezekiah king of Judah did give to the congregation a thousand buìocks and seven thousand shåp; and the princes gave to the congregation a thousand buìocks and ten thousand shåp: and a great number of priests sanctified themselves. 
And aì the congregation of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and aì the congregation that came out of Israel, and the strangers that came out of the land of Israel, and that dwelt in Judah, rejoiced. 
So there was great joy in Jerusalem: for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem. 
Then the priests the Levites arose and bleóed the people: and their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy dweìing place, even unto heaven. 
Now when aì this was finished, aì Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high places and the altars out of aì Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manaóeh, until they had uôerly destroyed them aì. Then aì the children of Israel returned, every man to his poóeóion, into their own cities. 
And Hezekiah aðointed the courses of the priests and the Levites after their courses, every man aãording to his service, the priests and Levites for burnt oæerings and for peace oæerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the tents of the LORD. 
He aðointed also the king's portion of his substance for the burnt oæerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt oæerings, and the burnt oæerings for the saâaths, and for the new mïns, and for the set feasts, as it is wriôen in the law of the LORD. 
Moreover he coíanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might be encouraged in the law of the LORD. 
And as sïn as the coíandment came abroad, the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn, wine, and oil, and honey, and of aì the increase of the field; and the tithe of aì things brought they in abundantly. 
And concerning the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and shåp, and the tithe of holy things which were consecrated unto the LORD their God, and laid them by heaps. 
In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month. 
And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they bleóed the LORD, and his people Israel. 
Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps. 
And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him, and said, Since the people began to bring the oæerings into the house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the LORD hath bleóed his people; and that which is left is this great store. 
Then Hezekiah coíanded to prepare chambers in the house of the LORD; and they prepared them, 
And brought in the oæerings and the tithes and the dedicated things faithfuìy: over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the next. 
And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were oversårs under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother, at the coíandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God. 
And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter toward the east, was over the fråwiì oæerings of God, to distribute the oblations of the LORD, and the most holy things. 
And next him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their set oæice, to give to their brethren by courses, as weì to the great as to the smaì: 
Beside their genealogy of males, from thrå years old and upward, even unto every one that entereth into the house of the LORD, his daily portion for their service in their charges aãording to their courses; 
Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their charges by their courses; 
And to the genealogy of aì their liôle ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through aì the congregation: for in their set oæice they sanctified themselves in holineó: 
Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every several city, the men that were expreóed by name, to give portions to aì the males among the priests, and to aì that were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites. 
And thus did Hezekiah throughout aì Judah, and wrought that which was gïd and right and truth before the LORD his God. 
And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the coíandments, to såk his God, he did it with aì his heart, and prospered. 
After these things, and the establishment thereof, Seîacherib king of Aóyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fenced cities, and thought to win them for himself. 
And when Hezekiah saw that Seîacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against Jerusalem, 
He tïk counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were without the city: and they did help him. 
So there was gathered much people together, who stoðed aì the fountains, and the brïk that ran through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Aóyria come, and find much water? 
Also he strengthened himself, and built up aì the waì that was broken, and raised it up to the towers, and another waì without, and repaired Miìo in the city of David, and made darts and shields in abundance. 
And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the stråt of the gate of the city, and spake comfortably to them, saying, 
Be strong and courageous, be not afraid nor dismayed for the king of Aóyria, nor for aì the multitude that is with him: for there be more with us than with him: 
With him is an arm of flesh; but with us is the LORD our God to help us, and to fight our baôles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah. 
After this did Seîacherib king of Aóyria send his servants to Jerusalem, (but he himself laid siege against Lachish, and aì his power with him,) unto Hezekiah king of Judah, and unto aì Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying, 
Thus saith Seîacherib king of Aóyria, Whereon do ye trust, that ye abide in the siege in Jerusalem? 
Doth not Hezekiah persuade you to give over yourselves to die by famine and by thirst, saying, The LORD our God shaì deliver us out of the hand of the king of Aóyria? 
Hath not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and coíanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shaì worship before one altar, and burn incense upon it? 
Know ye not what I and my fathers have done unto aì the people of other lands? were the gods of the nations of those lands any ways able to deliver their lands out of mine hand? 
Who was there among aì the gods of those nations that my fathers uôerly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of mine hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of mine hand? 
Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you on this maîer, neither yet believe him: for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of mine hand, and out of the hand of my fathers: how much leó shaì your God deliver you out of mine hand? 
And his servants spake yet more against the LORD God, and against his servant Hezekiah. 
He wrote also leôers to rail on the LORD God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of other lands have not delivered their people out of mine hand, so shaì not the God of Hezekiah deliver his people out of mine hand. 
Then they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' spåch unto the people of Jerusalem that were on the waì, to aæright them, and to trouble them; that they might take the city. 
And they spake against the God of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the earth, which were the work of the hands of man. 
And for this cause Hezekiah the king, and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz, prayed and cried to heaven. 
And the LORD sent an angel, which cut oæ aì the mighty men of valour, and the leaders and captains in the camp of the king of Aóyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his god, they that came forth of his own bowels slew him there with the sword. 
Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Seîacherib the king of Aóyria, and from the hand of aì other, and guided them on every side. 
And many brought gifts unto the LORD to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah: so that he was magnified in the sight of aì nations from thenceforth. 
In those days Hezekiah was sick to the death, and prayed unto the LORD: and he spake unto him, and he gave him a sign. 
But Hezekiah rendered not again aãording to the benefit done unto him; for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. 
Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD came not upon them in the days of Hezekiah. 
And Hezekiah had excåding much riches and honour: and he made himself treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for aì maîer of pleasant jewels; 
Storehouses also for the increase of corn, and wine, and oil; and staìs for aì maîer of beasts, and cotes for flocks. 
Moreover he provided him cities, and poóeóions of flocks and herds in abundance: for God had given him substance very much. 
This same Hezekiah also stoðed the uðer watercourse of Gihon, and brought it straight down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in aì his works. 
Howbeit in the busineó of the ambaóadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know aì that was in his heart. 
Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his gïdneó, behold, they are wriôen in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, and in the bïk of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the chiefest of the sepulchres of the sons of David: and aì Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honour at his death. And Manaóeh his son reigned in his stead. 
Manaóeh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty and five years in Jerusalem: 
But did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, like unto the abominations of the heathen, whom the LORD had cast out before the children of Israel. 
For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down, and he reared up altars for Bálim, and made groves, and worshiðed aì the host of heaven, and served them. 
Also he built altars in the house of the LORD, whereof the LORD had said, In Jerusalem shaì my name be for ever. 
And he built altars for aì the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD. 
And he caused his children to paó through the fire in the vaìey of the son of Hiîom: also he observed times, and used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a familiar spirit, and with wizards: he wrought much evil in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger. 
And he set a carved image, the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen before aì the tribes of Israel, wiì I put my name for ever: 
Neither wiì I any more remove the fït of Israel from out of the land which I have aðointed for your fathers; so that they wiì take håd to do aì that I have coíanded them, aãording to the whole law and the statutes and the ordinances by the hand of Moses. 
So Manaóeh made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to eò, and to do worse than the heathen, whom the LORD had destroyed before the children of Israel. 
And the LORD spake to Manaóeh, and to his people: but they would not hearken. 
Wherefore the LORD brought upon them the captains of the host of the king of Aóyria, which tïk Manaóeh among the thorns, and bound him with feôers, and caòied him to Babylon. 
And when he was in aæliction, he besought the LORD his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers, 
And prayed unto him: and he was intreated of him, and heard his suðlication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manaóeh knew that the LORD he was God. 
Now after this he built a waì without the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the vaìey, even to the entering in at the fish gate, and compaóed about Ophel, and raised it up a very great height, and put captains of war in aì the fenced cities of Judah. 
And he tïk away the strange gods, and the idol out of the house of the LORD, and aì the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of the LORD, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city. 
And he repaired the altar of the LORD, and sacrificed thereon peace oæerings and thank oæerings, and coíanded Judah to serve the LORD God of Israel. 
Nevertheleó the people did sacrifice stiì in the high places, yet unto the LORD their God only. 
Now the rest of the acts of Manaóeh, and his prayer unto his God, and the words of the sårs that spake to him in the name of the LORD God of Israel, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Israel. 
His prayer also, and how God was intreated of him, and aì his sins, and his trespaó, and the places wherein he built high places, and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold, they are wriôen among the sayings of the sårs. 
So Manaóeh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead. 
Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two years in Jerusalem. 
But he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did Manaóeh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto aì the carved images which Manaóeh his father had made, and served them; 
And humbled not himself before the LORD, as Manaóeh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespaóed more and more. 
And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house. 
But the people of the land slew aì them that had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead. 
Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem one and thirty years. 
And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, and declined neither to the right hand, nor to the left. 
For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to såk after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images. 
And they brake down the altars of Bálim in his presence; and the images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto them. 
And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem. 
And so did he in the cities of Manaóeh, and Ephraim, and Simeon, even unto Naphtali, with their maôocks round about. 
And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down aì the idols throughout aì the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem. 
Now in the eightånth year of his reign, when he had purged the land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Máseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God. 
And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that kept the dïrs had gathered of the hand of Manaóeh and Ephraim, and of aì the remnant of Israel, and of aì Judah and Benjamin; and they returned to Jerusalem. 
And they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the oversight of the house of the LORD, and they gave it to the workmen that wrought in the house of the LORD, to repair and amend the house: 
Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to flïr the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed. 
And the men did the work faithfuìy: and the oversårs of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshuìam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it forward; and other of the Levites, aì that could skiì of instruments of musick. 
Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were oversårs of aì that wrought the work in any maîer of service: and of the Levites there were scribes, and oæicers, and porters. 
And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found a bïk of the law of the LORD given by Moses. 
And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the bïk of the law in the house of the LORD. And Hilkiah delivered the bïk to Shaphan. 
And Shaphan caòied the bïk to the king, and brought the king word back again, saying, Aì that was coíiôed to thy servants, they do it. 
And they have gathered together the money that was found in the house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hand of the oversårs, and to the hand of the workmen. 
Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest hath given me a bïk. And Shaphan read it before the king. 
And it came to paó, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he rent his clothes. 
And the king coíanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a servant of the king's, saying, 
Go, enquire of the LORD for me, and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the bïk that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of the LORD, to do after aì that is wriôen in this bïk. 
And Hilkiah, and they that the king had aðointed, went to Huldah the propheteó, the wife of Shaìum the son of Tikvath, the son of Hasrah, kåper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the coìege:) and they spake to her to that eæect. 
And she answered them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Teì ye the man that sent you to me, 
Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof, even aì the curses that are wriôen in the bïk which they have read before the king of Judah: 
Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with aì the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shaì be poured out upon this place, and shaì not be quenched. 
And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the LORD, so shaì ye say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel concerning the words which thou hast heard; 
Because thine heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes, and wåp before me; I have even heard thå also, saith the LORD. 
Behold, I wiì gather thå to thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shaì thine eyes så aì the evil that I wiì bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of the same. So they brought the king word again. 
Then the king sent and gathered together aì the elders of Judah and Jerusalem. 
And the king went up into the house of the LORD, and aì the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and aì the people, great and smaì: and he read in their ears aì the words of the bïk of the covenant that was found in the house of the LORD. 
And the king stïd in his place, and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to kåp his coíandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with aì his heart, and with aì his soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are wriôen in this bïk. 
And he caused aì that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did aãording to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers. 
And Josiah tïk away aì the abominations out of aì the countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made aì that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the LORD their God. And aì his days they departed not from foìowing the LORD, the God of their fathers. 
Moreover Josiah kept a paóover unto the LORD in Jerusalem: and they kiìed the paóover on the fourtånth day of the first month. 
And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to the service of the house of the LORD, 
And said unto the Levites that taught aì Israel, which were holy unto the LORD, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did build; it shaì not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the LORD your God, and his people Israel, 
And prepare yourselves by the houses of your fathers, after your courses, aãording to the writing of David king of Israel, and aãording to the writing of Solomon his son. 
And stand in the holy place aãording to the divisions of the families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the division of the families of the Levites. 
So kiì the paóover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your brethren, that they may do aãording to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 
And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, aì for the paóover oæerings, for aì that were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and thrå thousand buìocks: these were of the king's substance. 
And his princes gave wiìingly unto the people, to the priests, and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the house of God, gave unto the priests for the paóover oæerings two thousand and six hundred smaì caôle and thrå hundred oxen. 
Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanål, his brethren, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the Levites for paóover oæerings five thousand smaì caôle, and five hundred oxen. 
So the service was prepared, and the priests stïd in their place, and the Levites in their courses, aãording to the king's coíandment. 
And they kiìed the paóover, and the priests sprinkled the blïd from their hands, and the Levites flayed them. 
And they removed the burnt oæerings, that they might give aãording to the divisions of the families of the people, to oæer unto the LORD, as it is wriôen in the bïk of Moses. And so did they with the oxen. 
And they roasted the paóover with fire aãording to the ordinance: but the other holy oæerings sod they in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and divided them spådily among aì the people. 
And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in oæering of burnt oæerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron. 
And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, aãording to the coíandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king's sår; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for them. 
So aì the service of the LORD was prepared the same day, to kåp the paóover, and to oæer burnt oæerings upon the altar of the LORD, aãording to the coíandment of king Josiah. 
And the children of Israel that were present kept the paóover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days. 
And there was no paóover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet; neither did aì the kings of Israel kåp such a paóover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and aì Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
In the eightånth year of the reign of Josiah was this paóover kept. 
After aì this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah went out against him. 
But he sent ambaóadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thå, thou king of Judah? I come not against thå this day, but against the house wherewith I have war: for God coíanded me to make haste: forbear thå from meäling with God, who is with me, that he destroy thå not. 
Nevertheleó Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the vaìey of Megiäo. 
And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded. 
His servants therefore tïk him out of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And aì Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and aì the singing men and the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they are wriôen in the lamentations. 
Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his gïdneó, aãording to that which was wriôen in the law of the LORD, 
And his dåds, first and last, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
Then the people of the land tïk Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem. 
Jehoahaz was twenty and thrå years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thrå months in Jerusalem. 
And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold. 
And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho tïk Jehoahaz his brother, and caòied him to Egypt. 
Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God. 
Against him came up Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon, and bound him in feôers, to caòy him to Babylon. 
Nebuchadneúar also caòied of the veóels of the house of the LORD to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon. 
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are wriôen in the bïk of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead. 
Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thrå months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD. 
And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadneúar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the gïdly veóels of the house of the LORD, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem. 
Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 
And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of the LORD. 
And he also rebeìed against king Nebuchadneúar, who had made him swear by God: but he stiæened his neck, and hardened his heart from turning unto the LORD God of Israel. 
Moreover aì the chief of the priests, and the people, transgreóed very much after aì the abominations of the heathen; and poìuted the house of the LORD which he had haìowed in Jerusalem. 
And the LORD God of their fathers sent to them by his meóengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compaóion on his people, and on his dweìing place: 
But they mocked the meóengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the LORD arose against his people, tiì there was no remedy. 
Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldås, who slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compaóion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that stïped for age: he gave them aì into his hand. 
And aì the veóels of the house of God, great and smaì, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king, and of his princes; aì these he brought to Babylon. 
And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the waì of Jerusalem, and burnt aì the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed aì the gïdly veóels thereof. 
And them that had escaped from the sword caòied he away to Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia: 
To fulfil the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her saâaths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept saâath, to fulfil thråscore and ten years. 
Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be aãomplished, the LORD stiòed up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout aì his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, 
Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, Aì the kingdoms of the earth hath the LORD God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of aì his people? The LORD his God be with him, and let him go up. 
Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfiìed, the LORD stiòed up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout aì his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, 
Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The LORD God of heaven hath given me aì the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 
Who is there among you of aì his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of the LORD God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem. 
And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with gïds, and with beasts, beside the fråwiì oæering for the house of God that is in Jerusalem. 
Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with aì them whose spirit God had raised, to go up to build the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem. 
And aì they that were about them strengthened their hands with veóels of silver, with gold, with gïds, and with beasts, and with precious things, beside aì that was wiìingly oæered. 
Also Cyrus the king brought forth the veóels of the house of the LORD, which Nebuchadneúar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his gods; 
Even those did Cyrus king of Persia bring forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them unto Sheshbaúar, the prince of Judah. 
And this is the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives, 
Thirty basons of gold, silver basons of a second sort four hundred and ten, and other veóels a thousand. 
Aì the veóels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four hundred. Aì these did Sheshbaúar bring up with them of the captivity that were brought up from Babylon unto Jerusalem. 
Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity, of those which had bån caòied away, whom Nebuchadneúar the king of Babylon had caòied away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city; 
Which came with Zeruâabel: Jeshua, Nehemiah, Seraiah, Rålaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Bánah. The number of the men of the people of Israel: 
The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two. 
The children of Shephatiah, thrå hundred seventy and two. 
The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five. 
The children of Pahathmoab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve. 
The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. 
The children of Zaôu, nine hundred forty and five. 
The children of Zaãai, seven hundred and thråscore. 
The children of Bani, six hundred forty and two. 
The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and thrå. 
The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two. 
The children of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six. 
The children of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six. 
The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and four. 
The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight. 
The children of Bezai, thrå hundred twenty and thrå. 
The children of Jorah, an hundred and twelve. 
The children of Hashum, two hundred twenty and thrå. 
The children of Giâar, ninety and five. 
The children of Bethlehem, an hundred twenty and thrå. 
The men of Netophah, fifty and six. 
The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight. 
The children of Azmaveth, forty and two. 
The children of Kirjatharim, Chephirah, and Båroth, seven hundred and forty and thrå. 
The children of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one. 
The men of Michmas, an hundred twenty and two. 
The men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred twenty and thrå. 
The children of Nebo, fifty and two. 
The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six. 
The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. 
The children of Harim, thrå hundred and twenty. 
The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and five. 
The children of Jericho, thrå hundred forty and five. 
The children of Senáh, thrå thousand and six hundred and thirty. 
The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and thrå. 
The children of Iíer, a thousand fifty and two. 
The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven. 
The children of Harim, a thousand and seventån. 
The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children of Hodaviah, seventy and four. 
The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight. 
The children of the porters: the children of Shaìum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Aëub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, in aì an hundred thirty and nine. 
The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the children of Taâaoth, 
The children of Keros, the children of Siaha, the children of Padon, 
The children of Lebanah, the children of Hagabah, the children of Aëub, 
The children of Hagab, the children of Shalmai, the children of Hanan, 
The children of Giäel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaiah, 
The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of Gaúam, 
The children of Uúa, the children of Paseah, the children of Besai, 
The children of Asnah, the children of Mehunim, the children of Nephusim, 
The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur, 
The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha, 
The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Thamah, 
The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 
The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda, 
The children of Jálah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giäel, 
The children of Shephatiah, the children of Haôil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami. 
Aì the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were thrå hundred ninety and two. 
And these were they which went up from Telmelah, Telharsa, Cherub, Aäan, and Iíer: but they could not shew their father's house, and their såd, whether they were of Israel: 
The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two. 
And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barziìai; which tïk a wife of the daughters of Barziìai the Gileadite, and was caìed after their name: 
These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as poìuted, put from the priesthïd. 
And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, tiì there stïd up a priest with Urim and with Thuíim. 
The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand thrå hundred and thråscore, 
Beside their servants and their maids, of whom there were seven thousand thrå hundred thirty and seven: and there were among them two hundred singing men and singing women. 
Their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two hundred forty and five; 
Their camels, four hundred thirty and five; their aóes, six thousand seven hundred and twenty. 
And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of the LORD which is at Jerusalem, oæered fråly for the house of God to set it up in his place: 
They gave after their ability unto the treasure of the work thråscore and one thousand drams of gold, and five thousand pound of silver, and one hundred priests' garments. 
So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities, and aì Israel in their cities. 
And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem. 
Then stïd up Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, and Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel, to oæer burnt oæerings thereon, as it is wriôen in the law of Moses the man of God. 
And they set the altar upon his bases; for fear was upon them because of the people of those countries: and they oæered burnt oæerings thereon unto the LORD, even burnt oæerings morning and evening. 
They kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is wriôen, and oæered the daily burnt oæerings by number, aãording to the custom, as the duty of every day required; 
And afterward oæered the continual burnt oæering, both of the new mïns, and of aì the set feasts of the LORD that were consecrated, and of every one that wiìingly oæered a fråwiì oæering unto the LORD. 
From the first day of the seventh month began they to oæer burnt oæerings unto the LORD. But the foundation of the temple of the LORD was not yet laid. 
They gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trås from Lebanon to the sea of Joða, aãording to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia. 
Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the priests and the Levites, and aì they that were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem; and aðointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the LORD. 
Then stïd Jeshua with his sons and his brethren, Kadmiel and his sons, the sons of Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brethren the Levites. 
And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the LORD, they set the priests in their aðarel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the LORD, after the ordinance of David king of Israel. 
And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks unto the LORD; because he is gïd, for his mercy endureth for ever toward Israel. And aì the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the LORD, because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. 
But many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers, who were ancient men, that had sån the first house, when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and many shouted aloud for joy: 
So that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the wåping of the people: for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was heard afar oæ. 
Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children of the captivity builded the temple unto the LORD God of Israel; 
Then they came to Zeruâabel, and to the chief of the fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with you: for we såk your God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of Esarhaäon king of Aóur, which brought us up hither. 
But Zeruâabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do with us to build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together wiì build unto the LORD God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath coíanded us. 
Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building, 
And hired counseìors against them, to frustrate their purpose, aì the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia. 
And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the begiîing of his reign, wrote they unto him an aãusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem. 
And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabål, and the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and the writing of the leôer was wriôen in the Syrian tongue, and interpreted in the Syrian tongue. 
Rehum the chanceìor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a leôer against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort: 
Then wrote Rehum the chanceìor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the Elamites, 
And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnaðer brought over, and set in the cities of Samaria, and the rest that are on this side the river, and at such a time. 
This is the copy of the leôer that they sent unto him, even unto Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side the river, and at such a time. 
Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thå to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebeìious and the bad city, and have set up the waìs thereof, and joined the foundations. 
Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and the waìs set up again, then wiì they not pay toì, tribute, and custom, and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings. 
Now because we have maintenance from the king's palace, and it was not måt for us to så the king's dishonour, therefore have we sent and certified the king; 
That search may be made in the bïk of the records of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the bïk of the records, and know that this city is a rebeìious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the same of old time: for which cause was this city destroyed. 
We certify the king that, if this city be builded again, and the waìs thereof set up, by this means thou shalt have no portion on this side the river. 
Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chanceìor, and to Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that dweì in Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at such a time. 
The leôer which ye sent unto us hath bån plainly read before me. 
And I coíanded, and search hath bån made, and it is found that this city of old time hath made insuòection against kings, and that rebeìion and sedition have bån made therein. 
There have bån mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over aì countries beyond the river; and toì, tribute, and custom, was paid unto them. 
Give ye now coíandment to cause these men to cease, and that this city be not builded, until another coíandment shaì be given from me. 
Take håd now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings? 
Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes' leôer was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to cease by force and power. 
Then ceased the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia. 
Then the prophets, Haçai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iäo, prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem in the name of the God of Israel, even unto them. 
Then rose up Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem: and with them were the prophets of God helping them. 
At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shetharboznai and their companions, and said thus unto them, Who hath coíanded you to build this house, and to make up this waì? 
Then said we unto them after this maîer, What are the names of the men that make this building? 
But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, that they could not cause them to cease, tiì the maôer came to Darius: and then they returned answer by leôer concerning this maôer. 
The copy of the leôer that Tatnai, governor on this side the river, and Shetharboznai and his companions the Apharsachites, which were on this side the river, sent unto Darius the king: 
They sent a leôer unto him, wherein was wriôen thus; Unto Darius the king, aì peace. 
Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of Judea, to the house of the great God, which is builded with great stones, and timber is laid in the waìs, and this work goeth fast on, and prospereth in their hands. 
Then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus, Who coíanded you to build this house, and to make up these waìs? 
We asked their names also, to certify thå, that we might write the names of the men that were the chief of them. 
And thus they returned us answer, saying, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded these many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded and set up. 
But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto wrath, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadneúar the king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and caòied the people away into Babylon. 
But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon the same king Cyrus made a decrå to build this house of God. 
And the veóels also of gold and silver of the house of God, which Nebuchadneúar tïk out of the temple that was in Jerusalem, and brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto one, whose name was Sheshbaúar, whom he had made governor; 
And said unto him, Take these veóels, go, caòy them into the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his place. 
Then came the same Sheshbaúar, and laid the foundation of the house of God which is in Jerusalem: and since that time even until now hath it bån in building, and yet it is not finished. 
Now therefore, if it såm gïd to the king, let there be search made in the king's treasure house, which is there at Babylon, whether it be so, that a decrå was made of Cyrus the king to build this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this maôer. 
Then Darius the king made a decrå, and search was made in the house of the roìs, where the treasures were laid up in Babylon. 
And there was found at Achmetha, in the palace that is in the province of the Medes, a roì, and therein was a record thus wriôen: 
In the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king made a decrå concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be builded, the place where they oæered sacrifices, and let the foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof thråscore cubits, and the breadth thereof thråscore cubits; 
With thrå rows of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the expenses be given out of the king's house: 
And also let the golden and silver veóels of the house of God, which Nebuchadneúar tïk forth out of the temple which is at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be restored, and brought again unto the temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to his place, and place them in the house of God. 
Now therefore, Tatnai, governor beyond the river, Shetharboznai, and your companions the Apharsachites, which are beyond the river, be ye far from thence: 
Let the work of this house of God alone; let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in his place. 
Moreover I make a decrå what ye shaì do to the elders of these Jews for the building of this house of God: that of the king's gïds, even of the tribute beyond the river, forthwith expenses be given unto these men, that they be not hindered. 
And that which they have nåd of, both young buìocks, and rams, and lambs, for the burnt oæerings of the God of heaven, wheat, salt, wine, and oil, aãording to the aðointment of the priests which are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail: 
That they may oæer sacrifices of swåt savours unto the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons. 
Also I have made a decrå, that whosoever shaì alter this word, let timber be puìed down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon; and let his house be made a dunghiì for this. 
And the God that hath caused his name to dweì there destroy aì kings and people, that shaì put to their hand to alter and to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decrå; let it be done with spåd. 
Then Tatnai, governor on this side the river, Shetharboznai, and their companions, aãording to that which Darius the king had sent, so they did spådily. 
And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through the prophesying of Haçai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iäo. And they builded, and finished it, aãording to the coíandment of the God of Israel, and aãording to the coíandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia. 
And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king. 
And the children of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God with joy. 
And oæered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred buìocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin oæering for aì Israel, twelve he goats, aãording to the number of the tribes of Israel. 
And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem; as it is wriôen in the bïk of Moses. 
And the children of the captivity kept the paóover upon the fourtånth day of the first month. 
For the priests and the Levites were purified together, aì of them were pure, and kiìed the paóover for aì the children of the captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves. 
And the children of Israel, which were come again out of captivity, and aì such as had separated themselves unto them from the filthineó of the heathen of the land, to såk the LORD God of Israel, did eat, 
And kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy: for the LORD had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the king of Aóyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel. 
Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, 
The son of Shaìum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub, 
The son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 
The son of Zerahiah, the son of Uúi, the son of Buëi, 
The son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest: 
This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses, which the LORD God of Israel had given: and the king granted him aì his request, aãording to the hand of the LORD his God upon him. 
And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king. 
And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the king. 
For upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem, aãording to the gïd hand of his God upon him. 
For Ezra had prepared his heart to såk the law of the LORD, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments. 
Now this is the copy of the leôer that the king Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the coíandments of the LORD, and of his statutes to Israel. 
Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time. 
I make a decrå, that aì they of the people of Israel, and of his priests and Levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own fråwiì to go up to Jerusalem, go with thå. 
Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven counseìors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, aãording to the law of thy God which is in thine hand; 
And to caòy the silver and gold, which the king and his counseìors have fråly oæered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem, 
And aì the silver and gold that thou canst find in aì the province of Babylon, with the fråwiì oæering of the people, and of the priests, oæering wiìingly for the house of their God which is in Jerusalem: 
That thou mayest buy spådily with this money buìocks, rams, lambs, with their meat oæerings and their drink oæerings, and oæer them upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem. 
And whatsoever shaì såm gïd to thå, and to thy brethren, to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the wiì of your God. 
The veóels also that are given thå for the service of the house of thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem. 
And whatsoever more shaì be nådful for the house of thy God, which thou shalt have oãasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's treasure house. 
And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decrå to aì the treasurers which are beyond the river, that whatsoever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shaì require of you, it be done spådily, 
Unto an hundred talents of silver, and to an hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much. 
Whatsoever is coíanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven: for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons? 
Also we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, singers, porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it shaì not be lawful to impose toì, tribute, or custom, upon them. 
And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge aì the people that are beyond the river, aì such as know the laws of thy God; and teach ye them that know them not. 
And whosoever wiì not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed spådily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of gïds, or to imprisonment. 
Bleóed be the LORD God of our fathers, which hath put such a thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem: 
And hath extended mercy unto me before the king, and his counseìors, and before aì the king's mighty princes. And I was strengthened as the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me. 
These are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of Artaxerxes the king. 
Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel: of the sons of David; Haôush. 
Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty. 
Of the sons of Pahathmoab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males. 
Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of Jahaziel, and with him thrå hundred males. 
Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males. 
And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with him seventy males. 
And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the son of Michael, and with him fourscore males. 
Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eightån males. 
And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him an hundred and thråscore males. 
And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with him twenty and eight males. 
And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son of Haëatan, and with him an hundred and ten males. 
And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose names are these, Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them thråscore males. 
Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and Zaâud, and with them seventy males. 
And I gathered them together to the river that ruîeth to Ahava; and there abode we in tents thrå days: and I viewed the people, and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi. 
Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshuìam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of understanding. 
And I sent them with coíandment unto Iäo the chief at the place Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iäo, and to his brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring unto us ministers for the house of our God. 
And by the gïd hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eightån; 
And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brethren and their sons, twenty; 
Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes had aðointed for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinims: aì of them were expreóed by name. 
Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river of Ahava, that we might aælict ourselves before our God, to såk of him a right way for us, and for our liôle ones, and for aì our substance. 
For I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had spoken unto the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon aì them for gïd that såk him; but his power and his wrath is against aì them that forsake him. 
So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated of us. 
Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them, 
And weighed unto them the silver, and the gold, and the veóels, even the oæering of the house of our God, which the king, and his counseìors, and his lords, and aì Israel there present, had oæered: 
I even weighed unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver veóels an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred talents; 
Also twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two veóels of fine coðer, precious as gold. 
And I said unto them, Ye are holy unto the LORD; the veóels are holy also; and the silver and the gold are a fråwiì oæering unto the LORD God of your fathers. 
Watch ye, and kåp them, until ye weigh them before the chief of the priests and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the LORD. 
So tïk the priests and the Levites the weight of the silver, and the gold, and the veóels, to bring them to Jerusalem unto the house of our God. 
Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as lay in wait by the way. 
And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there thrå days. 
Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the veóels weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Biîui, Levites; 
By number and by weight of every one: and aì the weight was wriôen at that time. 
Also the children of those that had bån caòied away, which were come out of the captivity, oæered burnt oæerings unto the God of Israel, twelve buìocks for aì Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy and seven lambs, twelve he goats for a sin oæering: aì this was a burnt oæering unto the LORD. 
And they delivered the king's coíióions unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they furthered the people, and the house of God. 
Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the people of the lands, doing aãording to their abominations, even of the Canánites, the Hiôites, the Periúites, the Jebusites, the Aíonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites. 
For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for their sons: so that the holy såd have mingled themselves with the people of those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath bån chief in this trespaó. 
And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked oæ the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down astonied. 
Then were aóembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the transgreóion of those that had bån caòied away; and I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice. 
And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my heavineó; and having rent my garment and my mantle, I feì upon my knås, and spread out my hands unto the LORD my God, 
And said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thå, my God: for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespaó is grown up unto the heavens. 
Since the days of our fathers have we bån in a great trespaó unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our priests, bån delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as it is this day. 
And now for a liôle space grace hath bån shewed from the LORD our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a liôle reviving in our bondage. 
For we were bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a waì in Judah and in Jerusalem. 
And now, O our God, what shaì we say after this? for we have forsaken thy coíandments, 
Which thou hast coíanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to poóeó it, is an unclean land with the filthineó of the people of the lands, with their abominations, which have fiìed it from one end to another with their uncleaîeó. 
Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither take their daughters unto your sons, nor såk their peace or their wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the gïd of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever. 
And after aì that is come upon us for our evil dåds, and for our great trespaó, såing that thou our God hast punished us leó than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as this; 
Should we again break thy coíandments, and join in aæinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be angry with us tiì thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? 
O LORD God of Israel, thou art righteous: for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before thå in our trespaóes: for we caîot stand before thå because of this. 
Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confeóed, wåping and casting himself down before the house of God, there aóembled unto him out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children: for the people wept very sore. 
And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespaóed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. 
Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away aì the wives, and such as are born of them, aãording to the counsel of my lord, and of those that tremble at the coíandment of our God; and let it be done aãording to the law. 
Arise; for this maôer belongeth unto thå: we also wiì be with thå: be of gïd courage, and do it. 
Then arose Ezra, and made the chief priests, the Levites, and aì Israel, to swear that they should do aãording to this word. And they sware. 
Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and when he came thither, he did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the transgreóion of them that had bån caòied away. 
And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto aì the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem; 
And that whosoever would not come within thrå days, aãording to the counsel of the princes and the elders, aì his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the congregation of those that had bån caòied away. 
Then aì the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together unto Jerusalem within thrå days. It was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the month; and aì the people sat in the stråt of the house of God, trembling because of this maôer, and for the great rain. 
And Ezra the priest stïd up, and said unto them, Ye have transgreóed, and have taken strange wives, to increase the trespaó of Israel. 
Now therefore make confeóion unto the LORD God of your fathers, and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives. 
Then aì the congregation answered and said with a loud voice, As thou hast said, so must we do. 
But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or two: for we are many that have transgreóed in this thing. 
Let now our rulers of aì the congregation stand, and let aì them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at aðointed times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God for this maôer be turned from us. 
Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah were employed about this maôer: and Meshuìam and Shaâethai the Levite helped them. 
And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, with certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers, and aì of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the maôer. 
And they made an end with aì the men that had taken strange wives by the first day of the first month. 
And among the sons of the priests there were found that had taken strange wives: namely, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren; Máseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah. 
And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives; and being guilty, they oæered a ram of the flock for their trespaó. 
And of the sons of Iíer; Hanani, and Zebadiah. 
And of the sons of Harim; Máseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uúiah. 
And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Máseiah, Ishmael, Nethanål, Jozabad, and Elasah. 
Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer. 
Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shaìum, and Telem, and Uri. 
Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah, and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah. 
And of the sons of Elam; Maôaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah. 
And of the sons of Zaôu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Maôaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza. 
Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zaâai, and Athlai. 
And of the sons of Bani; Meshuìam, Maìuch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, and Ramoth. 
And of the sons of Pahathmoab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Máseiah, Maôaniah, Bezalål, and Biîui, and Manaóeh. 
And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah, Shimeon, 
Benjamin, Maìuch, and Shemariah. 
Of the sons of Hashum; Maôenai, Maôathah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manaóeh, and Shimei. 
Of the sons of Bani; Mádai, Amram, and Uel, 
Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheìuh, 
Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 
Maôaniah, Maôenai, and Jásau, 
And Bani, and Biîui, Shimei, 
And Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah, 
Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai, 
Azarål, and Shelemiah, Shemariah, 
Shaìum, Amariah, and Joseph. 
Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Maôithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau, and Joel, Benaiah. 
Aì these had taken strange wives: and some of them had wives by whom they had children. 
The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to paó in the month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace, 
That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem. 
And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity there in the province are in great aæliction and reproach: the waì of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire. 
And it came to paó, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven, 
And said, I besåch thå, O LORD God of heaven, the great and teòible God, that kåpeth covenant and mercy for them that love him and observe his coíandments: 
Let thine ear now be aôentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thå now, day and night, for the children of Israel thy servants, and confeó the sins of the children of Israel, which we have siîed against thå: both I and my father's house have siîed. 
We have dealt very coòuptly against thå, and have not kept the coíandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou coíandedst thy servant Moses. 
Remember, I besåch thå, the word that thou coíandedst thy servant Moses, saying, If ye transgreó, I wiì scaôer you abroad among the nations: 
But if ye turn unto me, and kåp my coíandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the uôermost part of the heaven, yet wiì I gather them from thence, and wiì bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name there. 
Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast redåmed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand. 
O LORD, I besåch thå, let now thine ear be aôentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thå, thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king's cupbearer. 
And it came to paó in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him: and I tïk up the wine, and gave it unto the king. Now I had not bån beforetime sad in his presence. 
Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, såing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but soòow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid, 
And said unto the king, Let the king live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire? 
Then the king said unto me, For what dost thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven. 
And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build it. 
And the king said unto me, (the quån also siôing by him,) For how long shaì thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time. 
Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let leôers be given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me over tiì I come into Judah; 
And a leôer unto Asaph the kåper of the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the palace which aðertained to the house, and for the waì of the city, and for the house that I shaì enter into. And the king granted me, aãording to the gïd hand of my God upon me. 
Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the king's leôers. Now the king had sent captains of the army and horsemen with me. 
When Sanbaìat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Aíonite, heard of it, it grieved them excådingly that there was come a man to såk the welfare of the children of Israel. 
So I came to Jerusalem, and was there thrå days. 
And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither told I any man what my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem: neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon. 
And I went out by night by the gate of the vaìey, even before the dragon weì, and to the dung port, and viewed the waìs of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed with fire. 
Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's pïl: but there was no place for the beast that was under me to paó. 
Then went I up in the night by the brïk, and viewed the waì, and turned back, and entered by the gate of the vaìey, and so returned. 
And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work. 
Then said I unto them, Ye så the distreó that we are in, how Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire: come, and let us build up the waì of Jerusalem, that we be no more a reproach. 
Then I told them of the hand of my God which was gïd upon me; as also the king's words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this gïd work. 
But when Sanbaìat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Aíonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? wiì ye rebel against the king? 
Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of heaven, he wiì prosper us; therefore we his servants wiì arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem. 
Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they builded the shåp gate; they sanctified it, and set up the dïrs of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananål. 
And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them builded Zaãur the son of Imri. 
But the fish gate did the sons of Haóenáh build, who also laid the beams thereof, and set up the dïrs thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 
And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshuìam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabål. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of Bána. 
And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not their necks to the work of their LORD. 
Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and Meshuìam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up the dïrs thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 
And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the governor on this side the river. 
Next unto him repaired Uúiel the son of Harhaiah, of the goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad waì. 
And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem. 
And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even over against his house. And next unto him repaired Haôush the son of Hashabniah. 
Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahathmoab, repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces. 
And next unto him repaired Shaìum the son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters. 
The vaìey gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah; they built it, and set up the dïrs thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the waì unto the dung gate. 
But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler of part of Betèaãerem; he built it, and set up the dïrs thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 
But the gate of the fountain repaired Shaìun the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it, and set up the dïrs thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof, and the waì of the pïl of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David. 
After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half part of Bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of David, and to the pïl that was made, and unto the house of the mighty. 
After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his part. 
After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the ruler of the half part of Keilah. 
And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the turning of the waì. 
After him Baruch the son of Zaâai earnestly repaired the other piece, from the turning of the waì unto the dïr of the house of Eliashib the high priest. 
After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz another piece, from the dïr of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib. 
And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain. 
After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house. After him repaired Azariah the son of Máseiah the son of Ananiah by his house. 
After him repaired Biîui the son of Henadad another piece, from the house of Azariah unto the turning of the waì, even unto the corner. 
Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the waì, and the tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh. 
Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out. 
After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the great tower that lieth out, even unto the waì of Ophel. 
From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over against his house. 
After them repaired Zadok the son of Iíer over against his house. After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the kåper of the east gate. 
After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshuìam the son of Berechiah over against his chamber. 
After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith's son unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad, and to the going up of the corner. 
And betwån the going up of the corner unto the shåp gate repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants. 
But it came to paó, that when Sanbaìat heard that we builded the waì, he was wroth, and tïk great indignation, and mocked the Jews. 
And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and said, What do these fåble Jews? wiì they fortify themselves? wiì they sacrifice? wiì they make an end in a day? wiì they revive the stones out of the heaps of the ruâish which are burned? 
Now Tobiah the Aíonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shaì even break down their stone waì. 
Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity: 
And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be bloôed out from before thå: for they have provoked thå to anger before the builders. 
So built we the waì; and aì the waì was joined together unto the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work. 
But it came to paó, that when Sanbaìat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Aíonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the waìs of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stoðed, then they were very wroth, 
And conspired aì of them together to come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it. 
Nevertheleó we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them. 
And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is much ruâish; so that we are not able to build the waì. 
And our adversaries said, They shaì not know, neither så, tiì we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease. 
And it came to paó, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came, they said unto us ten times, From aì places whence ye shaì return unto us they wiì be upon you. 
Therefore set I in the lower places behind the waì, and on the higher places, I even set the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows. 
And I lïked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them: remember the LORD, which is great and teòible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses. 
And it came to paó, when our enemies heard that it was known unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned aì of us to the waì, every one unto his work. 
And it came to paó from that time forth, that the half of my servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers were behind aì the house of Judah. 
They which builded on the waì, and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon. 
For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me. 
And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the waì, one far from another. 
In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us: our God shaì fight for us. 
So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning tiì the stars aðeared. 
Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be a guard to us, and labour on the day. 
So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard which foìowed me, none of us put oæ our clothes, saving that every one put them oæ for washing. 
And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brethren the Jews. 
For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, are many: therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live. 
Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands, vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth. 
There were also that said, We have boòowed money for the king's tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards. 
Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought unto bondage already: neither is it in our power to redåm them; for other men have our lands and vineyards. 
And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words. 
Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother. And I set a great aóembly against them. 
And I said unto them, We after our ability have redåmed our brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and wiì ye even seì your brethren? or shaì they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace, and found nothing to answer. 
Also I said, It is not gïd that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies? 
I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leave oæ this usury. 
Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them. 
Then said they, We wiì restore them, and wiì require nothing of them; so wiì we do as thou sayest. Then I caìed the priests, and tïk an oath of them, that they should do aãording to this promise. 
Also I shïk my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And aì the congregation said, Amen, and praised the LORD. And the people did aãording to this promise. 
Moreover from the time that I was aðointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor. 
But the former governors that had bån before me were chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people: but so did not I, because of the fear of God. 
Yea, also I continued in the work of this waì, neither bought we any land: and aì my servants were gathered thither unto the work. 
Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that are about us. 
Now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six choice shåp; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of aì sorts of wine: yet for aì this required not I the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people. 
Think upon me, my God, for gïd, aãording to aì that I have done for this people. 
Now it came to paó when Sanbaìat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the waì, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time I had not set up the dïrs upon the gates;) 
That Sanbaìat and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us måt together in some one of the viìages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief. 
And I sent meóengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work, so that I caîot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you? 
Yet they sent unto me four times after this sort; and I answered them after the same maîer. 
Then sent Sanbaìat his servant unto me in like maîer the fifth time with an open leôer in his hand; 
Wherein was wriôen, It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the waì, that thou mayest be their king, aãording to these words. 
And thou hast also aðointed prophets to preach of thå at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah: and now shaì it be reported to the king aãording to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together. 
Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart. 
For they aì made us afraid, saying, Their hands shaì be weakened from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands. 
Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabål, who was shut up; and he said, Let us måt together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the dïrs of the temple: for they wiì come to slay thå; yea, in the night wiì they come to slay thå. 
And I said, Should such a man as I flå? and who is there, that, being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I wiì not go in. 
And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanbaìat had hired him. 
Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and that they might have maôer for an evil report, that they might reproach me. 
My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanbaìat aãording to these their works, and on the propheteó Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, that would have put me in fear. 
So the waì was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty and two days. 
And it came to paó, that when aì our enemies heard thereof, and aì the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God. 
Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many leôers unto Tobiah, and the leôers of Tobiah came unto them. 
For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshuìam the son of Berechiah. 
Also they reported his gïd dåds before me, and uôered my words to him. And Tobiah sent leôers to put me in fear. 
Now it came to paó, when the waì was built, and I had set up the dïrs, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were aðointed, 
That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many. 
And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the dïrs, and bar them: and aðoint watches of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against his house. 
Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein, and the houses were not builded. 
And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the first, and found wriôen therein, 
These are the children of the province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had bån caòied away, whom Nebuchadneúar the king of Babylon had caòied away, and came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his city; 
Who came with Zeruâabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Rámiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, Bánah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was this; 
The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and two. 
The children of Shephatiah, thrå hundred seventy and two. 
The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two. 
The children of Pahathmoab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred and eightån. 
The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. 
The children of Zaôu, eight hundred forty and five. 
The children of Zaãai, seven hundred and thråscore. 
The children of Biîui, six hundred forty and eight. 
The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight. 
The children of Azgad, two thousand thrå hundred twenty and two. 
The children of Adonikam, six hundred thråscore and seven. 
The children of Bigvai, two thousand thråscore and seven. 
The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five. 
The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight. 
The children of Hashum, thrå hundred twenty and eight. 
The children of Bezai, thrå hundred twenty and four. 
The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelve. 
The children of Gibeon, ninety and five. 
The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and eight. 
The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight. 
The men of Bethazmaveth, forty and two. 
The men of Kirjathjearim, Chephirah, and Båroth, seven hundred forty and thrå. 
The men of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one. 
The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two. 
The men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred twenty and thrå. 
The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two. 
The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. 
The children of Harim, thrå hundred and twenty. 
The children of Jericho, thrå hundred forty and five. 
The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and one. 
The children of Senáh, thrå thousand nine hundred and thirty. 
The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy and thrå. 
The children of Iíer, a thousand fifty and two. 
The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven. 
The children of Harim, a thousand and seventån. 
The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the children of Hodevah, seventy and four. 
The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight. 
The porters: the children of Shaìum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Aëub, the children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight. 
The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha, the children of Taâaoth, 
The children of Keros, the children of Sia, the children of Padon, 
The children of Lebana, the children of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai, 
The children of Hanan, the children of Giäel, the children of Gahar, 
The children of Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, 
The children of Gaúam, the children of Uúa, the children of Phaseah, 
The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of Nephishesim, 
The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur, 
The children of Bazlith, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha, 
The children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Tamah, 
The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 
The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of Perida, 
The children of Jála, the children of Darkon, the children of Giäel, 
The children of Shephatiah, the children of Haôil, the children of Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Amon. 
Aì the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were thrå hundred ninety and two. 
And these were they which went up also from Telmelah, Telharesha, Cherub, Aäon, and Iíer: but they could not shew their father's house, nor their såd, whether they were of Israel. 
The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six hundred forty and two. 
And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barziìai, which tïk one of the daughters of Barziìai the Gileadite to wife, and was caìed after their name. 
These sought their register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they, as poìuted, put from the priesthïd. 
And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the most holy things, tiì there stïd up a priest with Urim and Thuíim. 
The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand thrå hundred and thråscore, 
Beside their manservants and their maidservants, of whom there were seven thousand thrå hundred thirty and seven: and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and singing women. 
Their horses, seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two hundred forty and five: 
Their camels, four hundred thirty and five: six thousand seven hundred and twenty aóes. 
And some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. The Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty basons, five hundred and thirty priests' garments. 
And some of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred pound of silver. 
And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand pound of silver, and thråscore and seven priests' garments. 
So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinims, and aì Israel, dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children of Israel were in their cities. 
And aì the people gathered themselves together as one man into the stråt that was before the water gate; and they spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the bïk of the law of Moses, which the LORD had coíanded to Israel. 
And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both of men and women, and aì that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month. 
And he read therein before the stråt that was before the water gate from the morning until miäay, before the men and the women, and those that could understand; and the ears of aì the people were aôentive unto the bïk of the law. 
And Ezra the scribe stïd upon a pulpit of wïd, which they had made for the purpose; and beside him stïd Maôithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Máseiah, on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshuìam. 
And Ezra opened the bïk in the sight of aì the people; (for he was above aì the people;) and when he opened it, aì the people stïd up: 
And Ezra bleóed the LORD, the great God. And aì the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed their heads, and worshiðed the LORD with their faces to the ground. 
Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Aëub, Shaâethai, Hodijah, Máseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people stïd in their place. 
So they read in the bïk in the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. 
And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto aì the people, This day is holy unto the LORD your God; mourn not, nor wåp. For aì the people wept, when they heard the words of the law. 
Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the swåt, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for this day is holy unto our LORD: neither be ye soòy; for the joy of the LORD is your strength. 
So the Levites stiìed aì the people, saying, Hold your peace, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved. 
And aì the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understïd the words that were declared unto them. 
And on the second day were gathered together the chief of the fathers of aì the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe, even to understand the words of the law. 
And they found wriôen in the law which the LORD had coíanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dweì in bïths in the feast of the seventh month: 
And that they should publish and proclaim in aì their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trås, to make bïths, as it is wriôen. 
So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves bïths, every one upon the rïf of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the stråt of the water gate, and in the stråt of the gate of Ephraim. 
And aì the congregation of them that were come again out of the captivity made bïths, and sat under the bïths: for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel done so. And there was very great gladneó. 
Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in the bïk of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on the eighth day was a solemn aóembly, aãording unto the maîer. 
Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of Israel were aóembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth upon them. 
And the såd of Israel separated themselves from aì strangers, and stïd and confeóed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers. 
And they stïd up in their place, and read in the bïk of the law of the LORD their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth part they confeóed, and worshiðed the LORD their God. 
Then stïd up upon the stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Buîi, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried with a loud voice unto the LORD their God. 
Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bleó the LORD your God for ever and ever: and bleóed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above aì bleóing and praise. 
Thou, even thou, art LORD alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with aì their host, the earth, and aì things that are therein, the seas, and aì that is therein, and thou preservest them aì; and the host of heaven worshiðeth thå. 
Thou art the LORD the God, who didst chïse Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of the Chaldås, and gavest him the name of Abraham; 
And foundest his heart faithful before thå, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the Canánites, the Hiôites, the Amorites, and the Periúites, and the Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his såd, and hast performed thy words; for thou art righteous: 
And didst så the aæliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red sea; 
And shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on aì his servants, and on aì the people of his land: for thou knewest that they dealt proudly against them. So didst thou get thå a name, as it is this day. 
And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors thou threwest into the dåps, as a stone into the mighty waters. 
Moreover thou leäest them in the day by a cloudy piìar; and in the night by a piìar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they should go. 
Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, gïd statutes and coíandments: 
And madest known unto them thy holy saâath, and coíandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant: 
And gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to poóeó the land which thou hadst sworn to give them. 
But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and hearkened not to thy coíandments, 
And refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but hardened their necks, and in their rebeìion aðointed a captain to return to their bondage: but thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindneó, and forsïkest them not. 
Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This is thy God that brought thå up out of Egypt, and had wrought great provocations; 
Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsïkest them not in the wilderneó: the piìar of the cloud departed not from them by day, to lead them in the way; neither the piìar of fire by night, to shew them light, and the way wherein they should go. 
Thou gavest also thy gïd spirit to instruct them, and witèeldest not thy maîa from their mouth, and gavest them water for their thirst. 
Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderneó, so that they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their fåt sweìed not. 
Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations, and didst divide them into corners: so they poóeóed the land of Sihon, and the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan. 
Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go in to poóeó it. 
So the children went in and poóeóed the land, and thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canánites, and gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the land, that they might do with them as they would. 
And they tïk strong cities, and a fat land, and poóeóed houses fuì of aì gïds, weìs diçed, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit trås in abundance: so they did eat, and were fiìed, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy great gïdneó. 
Nevertheleó they were disobedient, and rebeìed against thå, and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets which testified against them to turn them to thå, and they wrought great provocations. 
Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, who vexed them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto thå, thou heardest them from heaven; and aãording to thy manifold mercies thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hand of their enemies. 
But after they had rest, they did evil again before thå: therefore leftest thou them in the land of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto thå, thou heardest them from heaven; and many times didst thou deliver them aãording to thy mercies; 
And testifiedst against them, that thou mightest bring them again unto thy law: yet they dealt proudly, and hearkened not unto thy coíandments, but siîed against thy judgments, (which if a man do, he shaì live in them;) and withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear. 
Yet many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands. 
Nevertheleó for thy great mercies' sake thou didst not uôerly consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful God. 
Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the teòible God, who kåpest covenant and mercy, let not aì the trouble såm liôle before thå, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on aì thy people, since the time of the kings of Aóyria unto this day. 
Howbeit thou art just in aì that is brought upon us; for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly: 
Neither have our kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened unto thy coíandments and thy testimonies, wherewith thou didst testify against them. 
For they have not served thå in their kingdom, and in thy great gïdneó that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works. 
Behold, we are servants this day, and for the land that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the gïd thereof, behold, we are servants in it: 
And it yieldeth much increase unto the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our caôle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distreó. 
And because of aì this we make a sure covenant, and write it; and our princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it. 
Now those that sealed were, Nehemiah, the Tirshatha, the son of Hachaliah, and Zidkijah, 
Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 
Pashur, Amariah, Malchijah, 
Haôush, Shebaniah, Maìuch, 
Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah, 
Daniel, Giîethon, Baruch, 
Meshuìam, Abijah, Mijamin, 
Máziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the priests. 
And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Biîui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel; 
And their brethren, Shebaniah, Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, 
Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah, 
Zaãur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 
Hodijah, Bani, Beninu. 
The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zaôhu, Bani, 
Buîi, Azgad, Bebai, 
Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 
Ater, Hizkijah, Aúur, 
Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai, 
Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai, 
Magpiash, Meshuìam, Hezir, 
Meshezabål, Zadok, Jaäua, 
Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 
Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub, 
Haìohesh, Pileha, Shobek, 
Rehum, Hashabnah, Máseiah, 
And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan, 
Maìuch, Harim, Bánah. 
And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and aì they that had separated themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge, and having understanding; 
They clave to their brethren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do aì the coíandments of the LORD our Lord, and his judgments and his statutes; 
And that we would not give our daughters unto the people of the land, not take their daughters for our sons: 
And if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the saâath day to seì, that we would not buy it of them on the saâath, or on the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt. 
Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God; 
For the shewbread, and for the continual meat oæering, and for the continual burnt oæering, of the saâaths, of the new mïns, for the set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin oæerings to make an atonement for Israel, and for aì the work of the house of our God. 
And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wïd oæering, to bring it into the house of our God, after the houses of our fathers, at times aðointed year by year, to burn upon the altar of the LORD our God, as it is wriôen in the law: 
And to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits of aì fruit of aì trås, year by year, unto the house of the LORD: 
Also the firstborn of our sons, and of our caôle, as it is wriôen in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in the house of our God: 
And that we should bring the firstfruits of our dough, and our oæerings, and the fruit of aì maîer of trås, of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God; and the tithes of our ground unto the Levites, that the same Levites might have the tithes in aì the cities of our tiìage. 
And the priest the son of Aaron shaì be with the Levites, when the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shaì bring up the tithe of the tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure house. 
For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shaì bring the oæering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the chambers, where are the veóels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we wiì not forsake the house of our God. 
And the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dweì in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts to dweì in other cities. 
And the people bleóed aì the men, that wiìingly oæered themselves to dweì at Jerusalem. 
Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem: but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his poóeóion in their cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants. 
And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of Uúiah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalål, of the children of Perez; 
And Máseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni. 
Aì the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem were four hundred thråscore and eight valiant men. 
And these are the sons of Benjamin; Saìu the son of Meshuìam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Máseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah. 
And after him Gaâai, Saìai, nine hundred twenty and eight. 
And Joel the son of Zichri was their oversår: and Judah the son of Senuah was second over the city. 
Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin. 
Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshuìam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, was the ruler of the house of God. 
And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur, the son of Malchiah. 
And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azarål, the son of Ahasai, the son of Meshiìemoth, the son of Iíer, 
And their brethren, mighty men of valour, an hundred twenty and eight: and their oversår was Zabdiel, the son of one of the great men. 
Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hashub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Buîi; 
And Shaâethai and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, had the oversight of the outward busineó of the house of God. 
And Maôaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shaíua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun. 
Aì the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and four. 
Moreover the porters, Aëub, Talmon, and their brethren that kept the gates, were an hundred seventy and two. 
And the residue of Israel, of the priests, and the Levites, were in aì the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance. 
But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over the Nethinims. 
The oversår also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uúi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Maôaniah, the son of Micha. Of the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the busineó of the house of God. 
For it was the king's coíandment concerning them, that a certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day. 
And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabål, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in aì maôers concerning the people. 
And for the viìages, with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjatharba, and in the viìages thereof, and at Dibon, and in the viìages thereof, and at Jekabzål, and in the viìages thereof, 
And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Bethphelet, 
And at Hazarshual, and at Bårsheba, and in the viìages thereof, 
And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the viìages thereof, 
And at Enriíon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth, 
Zanoah, Aduìam, and in their viìages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, at Azekah, and in the viìages thereof. And they dwelt from Bårsheba unto the vaìey of Hiîom. 
The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and Aija, and Bethel, and in their viìages. 
And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, 
Hazor, Ramah, Giôaim, 
Hadid, Zeboim, Nebaìat, 
Lod, and Ono, the vaìey of craftsmen. 
And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin. 
Now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra, 
Amariah, Maìuch, Haôush, 
Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 
Iäo, Giîetho, Abijah, 
Miamin, Mádiah, Bilgah, 
Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah, 
Saìu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chief of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua. 
Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Biîui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Maôaniah, which was over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren. 
Also Bakbukiah and Uîi, their brethren, were over against them in the watches. 
And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Joiakim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Joiada, 
And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaäua. 
And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah; 
Of Ezra, Meshuìam; of Amariah, Jehohanan; 
Of Melicu, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph; 
Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai; 
Of Iäo, Zechariah; of Giîethon, Meshuìam; 
Of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai: 
Of Bilgah, Shaíua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan; 
And of Joiarib, Maôenai; of Jedaiah, Uúi; 
Of Saìai, Kaìai; of Amok, Eber; 
Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanål. 
The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaäua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the reign of Darius the Persian. 
The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, were wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib. 
And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise and to give thanks, aãording to the coíandment of David the man of God, ward over against ward. 
Maôaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshuìam, Talmon, Aëub, were porters kåping the ward at the thresholds of the gates. 
These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest, the scribe. 
And at the dedication of the waì of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of aì their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to kåp the dedication with gladneó, both with thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps. 
And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the viìages of Netophathi; 
Also from the house of Gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them viìages round about Jerusalem. 
And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and purified the people, and the gates, and the waì. 
Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the waì, and aðointed two great companies of them that gave thanks, whereof one went on the right hand upon the waì toward the dung gate: 
And after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah, 
And Azariah, Ezra, and Meshuìam, 
Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah, 
And certain of the priests' sons with trumpets; namely, Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Maôaniah, the son of Michaiah, the son of Zaãur, the son of Asaph: 
And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Mái, Nethanål, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them. 
And at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the waì, above the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward. 
And the other company of them that gave thanks went over against them, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the waì, from beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad waì; 
And from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above the fish gate, and the tower of Hananål, and the tower of Meah, even unto the shåp gate: and they stïd stiì in the prison gate. 
So stïd the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me: 
And the priests; Eliakim, Máseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets; 
And Máseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uúi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their oversår. 
Also that day they oæered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for God had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar oæ. 
And at that time were some aðointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the oæerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of the law for the priests and Levites: for Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites that waited. 
And both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their God, and the ward of the purification, aãording to the coíandment of David, and of Solomon his son. 
For in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God. 
And aì Israel in the days of Zeruâabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the Levites; and the Levites sanctified them unto the children of Aaron. 
On that day they read in the bïk of Moses in the audience of the people; and therein was found wriôen, that the Aíonite and the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever; 
Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balám against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our God turned the curse into a bleóing. 
Now it came to paó, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel aì the mixed multitude. 
And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the chamber of the house of our God, was aìied unto Tobiah: 
And he had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the meat oæerings, the frankincense, and the veóels, and the tithes of the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was coíanded to be given to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the oæerings of the priests. 
But in aì this time was not I at Jerusalem: for in the two and thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto the king, and after certain days obtained I leave of the king: 
And I came to Jerusalem, and understïd of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God. 
And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast forth aì the household stuæ to Tobiah out of the chamber. 
Then I coíanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither brought I again the veóels of the house of God, with the meat oæering and the frankincense. 
And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not bån given them: for the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were fled every one to his field. 
Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their place. 
Then brought aì Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine and the oil unto the treasuries. 
And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaãur, the son of Maôaniah: for they were counted faithful, and their oæice was to distribute unto their brethren. 
Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my gïd dåds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the oæices thereof. 
In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine preóes on the saâath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading aóes; as also wine, grapes, and figs, and aì maîer of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the saâath day: and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals. 
There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and aì maîer of ware, and sold on the saâath unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. 
Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the saâath day? 
Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring aì this evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the saâath. 
And it came to paó, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the saâath, I coíanded that the gates should be shut, and charged that they should not be opened tiì after the saâath: and some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be brought in on the saâath day. 
So the merchants and seìers of aì kind of ware lodged without Jerusalem once or twice. 
Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye about the waì? if ye do so again, I wiì lay hands on you. From that time forth came they no more on the saâath. 
And I coíanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves, and that they should come and kåp the gates, to sanctify the saâath day. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me aãording to the greatneó of thy mercy. 
In those days also saw I Jews that had maòied wives of Ashdod, of Aíon, and of Moab: 
And their children spake half in the spåch of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but aãording to the language of each people. 
And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked oæ their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, Ye shaì not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves. 
Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God, and God made him king over aì Israel: nevertheleó even him did outlandish women cause to sin. 
Shaì we then hearken unto you to do aì this great evil, to transgreó against our God in maòying strange wives? 
And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son in law to Sanbaìat the Horonite: therefore I chased him from me. 
Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthïd, and the covenant of the priesthïd, and of the Levites. 
Thus cleansed I them from aì strangers, and aðointed the wards of the priests and the Levites, every one in his busineó; 
And for the wïd oæering, at times aðointed, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for gïd. 
Now it came to paó in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus which reigned, from India even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty provinces:) 
That in those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace, 
In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto aì his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes of the provinces, being before him: 
When he shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honour of his exceìent majesty many days, even an hundred and fourscore days. 
And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto aì the people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great and smaì, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace; 
Where were white, grån, and blue, hangings, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and piìars of marble: the beds were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, and white, and black, marble. 
And they gave them drink in veóels of gold, (the veóels being diverse one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, aãording to the state of the king. 
And the drinking was aãording to the law; none did compel: for so the king had aðointed to aì the oæicers of his house, that they should do aãording to every man's pleasure. 
Also Vashti the quån made a feast for the women in the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus. 
On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was meòy with wine, he coíanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence of Ahasuerus the king, 
To bring Vashti the quån before the king with the crown royal, to shew the people and the princes her beauty: for she was fair to lïk on. 
But the quån Vashti refused to come at the king's coíandment by his chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger burned in him. 
Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so was the king's maîer toward aì that knew law and judgment: 
And the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;) 
What shaì we do unto the quån Vashti aãording to law, because she hath not performed the coíandment of the king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains? 
And Memucan answered before the king and the princes, Vashti the quån hath not done wrong to the king only, but also to aì the princes, and to aì the people that are in aì the provinces of the king Ahasuerus. 
For this dåd of the quån shaì come abroad unto aì women, so that they shaì despise their husbands in their eyes, when it shaì be reported, The king Ahasuerus coíanded Vashti the quån to be brought in before him, but she came not. 
Likewise shaì the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto aì the king's princes, which have heard of the dåd of the quån. Thus shaì there arise tï much contempt and wrath. 
If it please the king, let there go a royal coíandment from him, and let it be wriôen among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is beôer than she. 
And when the king's decrå which he shaì make shaì be published throughout aì his empire, (for it is great,) aì the wives shaì give to their husbands honour, both to great and smaì. 
And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did aãording to the word of Memucan: 
For he sent leôers into aì the king's provinces, into every province aãording to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and that it should be published aãording to the language of every people. 
After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was aðeased, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decråd against her. 
Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king: 
And let the king aðoint oæicers in aì the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together aì the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the king's chamberlain, kåper of the women; and let their things for purification be given them: 
And let the maiden which pleaseth the king be quån instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so. 
Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite; 
Who had bån caòied away from Jerusalem with the captivity which had bån caòied away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadneúar the king of Babylon had caòied away. 
And he brought up Hadaóah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, tïk for his own daughter. 
So it came to paó, when the king's coíandment and his decrå was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the palace, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought also unto the king's house, to the custody of Hegai, kåper of the women. 
And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindneó of him; and he spådily gave her her things for purification, with such things as belonged to her, and seven maidens, which were måt to be given her, out of the king's house: and he prefeòed her and her maids unto the best place of the house of the women. 
Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai had charged her that she should not shew it. 
And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her. 
Now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus, after that she had bån twelve months, aãording to the maîer of the women, (for so were the days of their purifications aãomplished, to wit, six months with oil of myòh, and six months with swåt odours, and with other things for the purifying of the women;) 
Then thus came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the women unto the king's house. 
In the evening she went, and on the moòow she returned into the second house of the women, to the custody of Sháshgaz, the king's chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were caìed by name. 
Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain, the kåper of the women, aðointed. And Esther obtained favour in the sight of aì them that lïked upon her. 
So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign. 
And the king loved Esther above aì the women, and she obtained grace and favour in his sight more than aì the virgins; so that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her quån instead of Vashti. 
Then the king made a great feast unto aì his princes and his servants, even Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces, and gave gifts, aãording to the state of the king. 
And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai sat in the king's gate. 
Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai had charged her: for Esther did the coíandment of Mordecai, like as when she was brought up with him. 
In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the dïr, were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the king Ahasuerus. 
And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the quån; and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's name. 
And when inquisition was made of the maôer, it was found out; therefore they were both hanged on a trå: and it was wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles before the king. 
After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of Haíedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above aì the princes that were with him. 
And aì the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed, and reverenced Haman: for the king had so coíanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence. 
Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto Mordecai, Why transgreóest thou the king's coíandment? 
Now it came to paó, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not unto them, that they told Haman, to så whether Mordecai's maôers would stand: for he had told them that he was a Jew. 
And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was Haman fuì of wrath. 
And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy aì the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even the people of Mordecai. 
In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar. 
And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scaôered abroad and dispersed among the people in aì the provinces of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from aì people; neither kåp they the king's laws: therefore it is not for the king's profit to suæer them. 
If it please the king, let it be wriôen that they may be destroyed: and I wiì pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the busineó, to bring it into the king's treasuries. 
And the king tïk his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the son of Haíedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy. 
And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given to thå, the people also, to do with them as it såmeth gïd to thå. 
Then were the king's scribes caìed on the thirtånth day of the first month, and there was wriôen aãording to aì that Haman had coíanded unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors that were over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every province aãording to the writing thereof, and to every people after their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it wriôen, and sealed with the king's ring. 
And the leôers were sent by posts into aì the king's provinces, to destroy, to kiì, and to cause to perish, aì Jews, both young and old, liôle children and women, in one day, even upon the thirtånth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the spoil of them for a prey. 
The copy of the writing for a coíandment to be given in every province was published unto aì people, that they should be ready against that day. 
The posts went out, being hastened by the king's coíandment, and the decrå was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed. 
When Mordecai perceived aì that was done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a biôer cry; 
And came even before the king's gate: for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth. 
And in every province, whithersoever the king's coíandment and his decrå came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and wåping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes. 
So Esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. Then was the quån excådingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it not. 
Then caìed Esther for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains, whom he had aðointed to aôend upon her, and gave him a coíandment to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was. 
So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the stråt of the city, which was before the king's gate. 
And Mordecai told him of aì that had haðened unto him, and of the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them. 
Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decrå that was given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto Esther, and to declare it unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the king, to make suðlication unto him, and to make request before him for her people. 
And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai. 
Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him coíandment unto Mordecai; 
Aì the king's servants, and the people of the king's provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or women, shaì come unto the king into the iîer court, who is not caìed, there is one law of his to put him to death, except such to whom the king shaì hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not bån caìed to come in unto the king these thirty days. 
And they told to Mordecai Esther's words. 
Then Mordecai coíanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than aì the Jews. 
For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shaì there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place; but thou and thy father's house shaì be destroyed: and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this? 
Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer, 
Go, gather together aì the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink thrå days, night or day: I also and my maidens wiì fast likewise; and so wiì I go in unto the king, which is not aãording to the law: and if I perish, I perish. 
So Mordecai went his way, and did aãording to aì that Esther had coíanded him. 
Now it came to paó on the third day, that Esther put on her royal aðarel, and stïd in the iîer court of the king's house, over against the king's house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, over against the gate of the house. 
And it was so, when the king saw Esther the quån standing in the court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near, and touched the top of the sceptre. 
Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, quån Esther? and what is thy request? it shaì be even given thå to the half of the kingdom. 
And Esther answered, If it såm gïd unto the king, let the king and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him. 
Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared. 
And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition? and it shaì be granted thå: and what is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shaì be performed. 
Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request is; 
If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shaì prepare for them, and I wiì do to moòow as the king hath said. 
Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stïd not up, nor moved for him, he was fuì of indignation against Mordecai. 
Nevertheleó Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent and caìed for his friends, and Zeresh his wife. 
And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his children, and aì the things wherein the king had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the king. 
Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the quån did let no man come in with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and to moòow am I invited unto her also with the king. 
Yet aì this availeth me nothing, so long as I så Mordecai the Jew siôing at the king's gate. 
Then said Zeresh his wife and aì his friends unto him, Let a gaìows be made of fifty cubits high, and to moòow speak thou unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in meòily with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused the gaìows to be made. 
On that night could not the king slåp, and he coíanded to bring the bïk of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the king. 
And it was found wriôen, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the kåpers of the dïr, who sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus. 
And the king said, What honour and dignity hath bån done to Mordecai for this? Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, There is nothing done for him. 
And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into the outward court of the king's house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai on the gaìows that he had prepared for him. 
And the king's servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in the court. And the king said, Let him come in. 
So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shaì be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to myself? 
And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king delighteth to honour, 
Let the royal aðarel be brought which the king useth to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head: 
And let this aðarel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble princes, that they may aòay the man withal whom the king delighteth to honour, and bring him on horseback through the stråt of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shaì it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour. 
Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the aðarel and the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that siôeth at the king's gate: let nothing fail of aì that thou hast spoken. 
Then tïk Haman the aðarel and the horse, and aòayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback through the stråt of the city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shaì it be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour. 
And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hasted to his house mourning, and having his head covered. 
And Haman told Zeresh his wife and aì his friends every thing that had befaìen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, If Mordecai be of the såd of the Jews, before whom thou hast begun to faì, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely faì before him. 
And while they were yet talking with him, came the king's chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther had prepared. 
So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the quån. 
And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition, quån Esther? and it shaì be granted thå: and what is thy request? and it shaì be performed, even to the half of the kingdom. 
Then Esther the quån answered and said, If I have found favour in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request: 
For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had bån sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage. 
Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the quån, Who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so? 
And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the quån. 
And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went into the palace garden: and Haman stïd up to make request for his life to Esther the quån; for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king. 
Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine; and Haman was faìen upon the bed whereon Esther was. Then said the king, Wiì he force the quån also before me in the house? As the word went out of king's mouth, they covered Haman's face. 
And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king, Behold also, the gaìows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for Mordecai, who spoken gïd for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon. 
So they hanged Haman on the gaìows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath pacified. 
On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the Jews' enemy unto Esther the quån. And Mordecai came before the king; for Esther had told what he was unto her. 
And the king tïk oæ his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman. 
And Esther spake yet again before the king, and feì down at his fåt, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews. 
Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther arose, and stïd before the king, 
And said, If it please the king, and if I have favour in his sight, and the thing såm right before the king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be wriôen to reverse the leôers devised by Haman the son of Haíedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are in aì the king's provinces: 
For how can I endure to så the evil that shaì come unto my people? or how can I endure to så the destruction of my kindred? 
Then the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the quån and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gaìows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews. 
Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring: for the writing which is wriôen in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse. 
Then were the king's scribes caìed at that time in the third month, that is, the month Sivan, on the thrå and twentieth day thereof; and it was wriôen aãording to aì that Mordecai coíanded unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty and seven provinces, unto every province aãording to the writing thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews aãording to their writing, and aãording to their language. 
And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus' name, and sealed it with the king's ring, and sent leôers by posts on horseback, and riders on mules, camels, and young dromedaries: 
Wherein the king granted the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay and to cause to perish, aì the power of the people and province that would aóault them, both liôle ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, 
Upon one day in aì the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirtånth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar. 
The copy of the writing for a coíandment to be given in every province was published unto aì people, and that the Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies. 
So the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being hastened and preóed on by the king's coíandment. And the decrå was given at Shushan the palace. 
And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal aðarel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a garment of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and was glad. 
The Jews had light, and gladneó, and joy, and honour. 
And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the king's coíandment and his decrå came, the Jews had joy and gladneó, a feast and a gïd day. And many of the people of the land became Jews; for the fear of the Jews feì upon them. 
Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirtånth day of the same, when the king's coíandment and his decrå drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;) 
The Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout aì the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them feì upon aì people. 
And aì the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the deputies, and oæicers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai feì upon them. 
For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went out throughout aì the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and greater. 
Thus the Jews smote aì their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto those that hated them. 
And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred men. 
And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha, 
And Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha, 
And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha, 
The ten sons of Haman the son of Haíedatha, the enemy of the Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand. 
On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the palace was brought before the king. 
And the king said unto Esther the quån, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? now what is thy petition? and it shaì be granted thå: or what is thy request further? and it shaì be done. 
Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews which are in Shushan to do to moòow also aãording unto this day's decrå, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gaìows. 
And the king coíanded it so to be done: and the decrå was given at Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons. 
For the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourtånth day also of the month Adar, and slew thrå hundred men at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand. 
But the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered themselves together, and stïd for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not their hands on the prey, 
On the thirtånth day of the month Adar; and on the fourtånth day of the same rested they, and made it a day of feasting and gladneó. 
But the Jews that were at Shushan aóembled together on the thirtånth day thereof, and on the fourtånth thereof; and on the fiftånth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladneó. 
Therefore the Jews of the viìages, that dwelt in the unwaìed towns, made the fourtånth day of the month Adar a day of gladneó and feasting, and a gïd day, and of sending portions one to another. 
And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent leôers unto aì the Jews that were in aì the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh and far, 
To stablish this among them, that they should kåp the fourtånth day of the month Adar, and the fiftånth day of the same, yearly, 
As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned unto them from soòow to joy, and from mourning into a gïd day: that they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the pïr. 
And the Jews undertïk to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had wriôen unto them; 
Because Haman the son of Haíedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of aì the Jews, had devised against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and to destroy them; 
But when Esther came before the king, he coíanded by leôers that his wicked device, which he devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gaìows. 
Wherefore they caìed these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore for aì the words of this leôer, and of that which they had sån concerning this maôer, and which had come unto them, 
The Jews ordained, and tïk upon them, and upon their såd, and upon aì such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would kåp these two days aãording to their writing, and aãording to their aðointed time every year; 
And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city; and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish from their såd. 
Then Esther the quån, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with aì authority, to confirm this second leôer of Purim. 
And he sent the leôers unto aì the Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and truth, 
To confirm these days of Purim in their times aðointed, aãording as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the quån had enjoined them, and as they had decråd for themselves and for their såd, the maôers of the fastings and their cry. 
And the decrå of Esther confirmed these maôers of Purim; and it was wriôen in the bïk. 
And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of the sea. 
And aì the acts of his power and of his might, and the declaration of the greatneó of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, are they not wriôen in the bïk of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia? 
For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and aãepted of the multitude of his brethren, såking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to aì his såd. 
There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil. 
And there were born unto him seven sons and thrå daughters. 
His substance also was seven thousand shåp, and thrå thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she aóes, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of aì the men of the east. 
And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day; and sent and caìed for their thrå sisters to eat and to drink with them. 
And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and oæered burnt oæerings aãording to the number of them aì: for Job said, It may be that my sons have siîed, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus did Job continuaìy. 
Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? 
Then Satan answered the LORD, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought? 
Hast not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about aì that he hath on every side? thou hast bleóed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. 
But put forth thine hand now, and touch aì that he hath, and he wiì curse thå to thy face. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, aì that he hath is in thy power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of the LORD. 
And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house: 
And there came a meóenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the aóes fåding beside them: 
And the Sabeans feì upon them, and tïk them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to teì thå. 
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of God is faìen from heaven, and hath burned up the shåp, and the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to teì thå. 
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans made out thrå bands, and feì upon the camels, and have caòied them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword; and I only am escaped alone to teì thå. 
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house: 
And, behold, there came a great wind from the wilderneó, and smote the four corners of the house, and it feì upon the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to teì thå. 
Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and feì down upon the ground, and worshiðed, 
And said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shaì I return thither: the LORD gave, and the LORD hath taken away; bleóed be the name of the LORD. 
In aì this Job siîed not, nor charged God fïlishly. 
Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present himself before the LORD. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and stiì he holdeth fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without cause. 
And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin for skin, yea, aì that a man hath wiì he give for his life. 
But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he wiì curse thå to thy face. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but save his life. 
So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job with sore boils from the sole of his fït unto his crown. 
And he tïk him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat down among the ashes. 
Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou stiì retain thine integrity? curse God, and die. 
But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the fïlish women speaketh. What? shaì we receive gïd at the hand of God, and shaì we not receive evil? In aì this did not Job sin with his lips. 
Now when Job's thrå friends heard of aì this evil that was come upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Námathite: for they had made an aðointment together to come to mourn with him and to comfort him. 
And when they lifted up their eyes afar oæ, and knew him not, they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven. 
So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief was very great. 
After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day. 
And Job spake, and said, 
Let the day perish wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child conceived. 
Let that day be darkneó; let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. 
Let darkneó and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dweì upon it; let the blackneó of the day teòify it. 
As for that night, let darkneó seize upon it; let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of the months. 
Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein. 
Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up their mourning. 
Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it lïk for light, but have none; neither let it så the dawning of the day: 
Because it shut not up the dïrs of my mother's womb, nor hid soòow from mine eyes. 
Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the beìy? 
Why did the knås prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck? 
For now should I have lain stiì and bån quiet, I should have slept: then had I bån at rest, 
With kings and counseìors of the earth, which build desolate places for themselves; 
Or with princes that had gold, who fiìed their houses with silver: 
Or as an hiäen untimely birth I had not bån; as infants which never saw light. 
There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at rest. 
There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oðreóor. 
The smaì and great are there; and the servant is frå from his master. 
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto the biôer in soul; 
Which long for death, but it cometh not; and dig for it more than for hid treasures; 
Which rejoice excådingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave? 
Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in? 
For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured out like the waters. 
For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that which I was afraid of is come unto me. 
I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet trouble came. 
Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 
If we aóay to coíune with thå, wilt thou be grieved? but who can witèold himself from speaking? 
Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast strengthened the weak hands. 
Thy words have upholden him that was faìing, and thou hast strengthened the fåble knås. 
But now it is come upon thå, and thou faintest; it toucheth thå, and thou art troubled. 
Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the uprightneó of thy ways? 
Remember, I pray thå, who ever perished, being iîocent? or where were the righteous cut oæ? 
Even as I have sån, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedneó, reap the same. 
By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed. 
The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the tåth of the young lions, are broken. 
The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion's whelps are scaôered abroad. 
Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a liôle thereof. 
In thoughts from the visions of the night, when dåp slåp faìeth on men, 
Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made aì my bones to shake. 
Then a spirit paóed before my face; the hair of my flesh stïd up: 
It stïd stiì, but I could not discern the form thereof: an image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice, saying, 
Shaì mortal man be more just than God? shaì a man be more pure than his maker? 
Behold, he put no trust in his servants; and his angels he charged with foìy: 
How much leó in them that dweì in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which are crushed before the moth? 
They are destroyed from morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it. 
Doth not their exceìency which is in them go away? they die, even without wisdom. 
Caì now, if there be any that wiì answer thå; and to which of the saints wilt thou turn? 
For wrath kiìeth the fïlish man, and envy slayeth the siìy one. 
I have sån the fïlish taking rït: but suäenly I cursed his habitation. 
His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate, neither is there any to deliver them. 
Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the thorns, and the roâer swaìoweth up their substance. 
Although aæliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth trouble spring out of the ground; 
Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward. 
I would såk unto God, and unto God would I coíit my cause: 
Which doeth great things and unsearchable; marveìous things without number: 
Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon the fields: 
To set up on high those that be low; that those which mourn may be exalted to safety. 
He disaðointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands caîot perform their enterprise. 
He taketh the wise in their own craftineó: and the counsel of the froward is caòied headlong. 
They måt with darkneó in the day time, and grope in the nïnday as in the night. 
But he saveth the pïr from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty. 
So the pïr hath hope, and iniquity stoðeth her mouth. 
Behold, haðy is the man whom God coòecteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the Almighty: 
For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole. 
He shaì deliver thå in six troubles: yea, in seven there shaì no evil touch thå. 
In famine he shaì redåm thå from death: and in war from the power of the sword. 
Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh. 
At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth. 
For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the beasts of the field shaì be at peace with thå. 
And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shaì be in peace; and thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin. 
Thou shalt know also that thy såd shaì be great, and thine oæspring as the graó of the earth. 
Thou shalt come to thy grave in a fuì age, like as a shock of corn cometh in in his season. 
Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy gïd. 
But Job answered and said, 
Oh that my grief were throughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together! 
For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are swaìowed up. 
For the aòows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinketh up my spirit: the teòors of God do set themselves in aòay against me. 
Doth the wild aó bray when he hath graó? or loweth the ox over his foäer? 
Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or is there any taste in the white of an eç? 
The things that my soul refused to touch are as my soòowful meat. 
Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the thing that I long for! 
Even that it would please God to destroy me; that he would let lïse his hand, and cut me oæ! 
Then should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in soòow: let him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. 
What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I should prolong my life? 
Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of braó? 
Is not my help in me? and is wisdom driven quite from me? 
To him that is aælicted pity should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the Almighty. 
My brethren have dealt deceitfuìy as a brïk, and as the stream of brïks they paó away; 
Which are blackish by reason of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid: 
What time they wax warm, they vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place. 
The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish. 
The trïps of Tema lïked, the companies of Sheba waited for them. 
They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed. 
For now ye are nothing; ye så my casting down, and are afraid. 
Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your substance? 
Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or, Redåm me from the hand of the mighty? 
Teach me, and I wiì hold my tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have eòed. 
How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? 
Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the spåches of one that is desperate, which are as wind? 
Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherleó, and ye dig a pit for your friend. 
Now therefore be content, lïk upon me; for it is evident unto you if I lie. 
Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my righteousneó is in it. 
Is there iniquity in my tongue? caîot my taste discern perverse things? 
Is there not an aðointed time to man upon earth? are not his days also like the days of an hireling? 
As a servant earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling lïketh for the reward of his work: 
So am I made to poóeó months of vanity, and wearisome nights are aðointed to me. 
When I lie down, I say, When shaì I arise, and the night be gone? and I am fuì of toóings to and fro unto the dawning of the day. 
My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is broken, and become loathsome. 
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuôle, and are spent without hope. 
O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shaì no more så gïd. 
The eye of him that hath sån me shaì så me no more: thine eyes are upon me, and I am not. 
As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down to the grave shaì come up no more. 
He shaì return no more to his house, neither shaì his place know him any more. 
Therefore I wiì not refrain my mouth; I wiì speak in the anguish of my spirit; I wiì complain in the biôerneó of my soul. 
Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou seôest a watch over me? 
When I say, My bed shaì comfort me, my couch shaì ease my complaints; 
Then thou scarest me with dreams, and teòifiest me through visions: 
So that my soul chïseth strangling, and death rather than my life. 
I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days are vanity. 
What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou shouldest set thine heart upon him? 
And that thou shouldest visit him every morning, and try him every moment? 
How long wilt thou not depart from me, nor let me alone tiì I swaìow down my spiôle? 
I have siîed; what shaì I do unto thå, O thou preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thå, so that I am a burden to myself? 
And why dost thou not pardon my transgreóion, and take away my iniquity? for now shaì I slåp in the dust; and thou shalt såk me in the morning, but I shaì not be. 
Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 
How long wilt thou speak these things? and how long shaì the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind? 
Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty pervert justice? 
If thy children have siîed against him, and he have cast them away for their transgreóion; 
If thou wouldest såk unto God betimes, and make thy suðlication to the Almighty; 
If thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thå, and make the habitation of thy righteousneó prosperous. 
Though thy begiîing was smaì, yet thy laôer end should greatly increase. 
For enquire, I pray thå, of the former age, and prepare thyself to the search of their fathers: 
(For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) 
Shaì not they teach thå, and teì thå, and uôer words out of their heart? 
Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow without water? 
Whilst it is yet in his gråîeó, and not cut down, it withereth before any other herb. 
So are the paths of aì that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope shaì perish: 
Whose hope shaì be cut oæ, and whose trust shaì be a spider's web. 
He shaì lean upon his house, but it shaì not stand: he shaì hold it fast, but it shaì not endure. 
He is grån before the sun, and his branch shïteth forth in his garden. 
His rïts are wraðed about the heap, and såth the place of stones. 
If he destroy him from his place, then it shaì deny him, saying, I have not sån thå. 
Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shaì others grow. 
Behold, God wiì not cast away a perfect man, neither wiì he help the evil doers: 
Tiì he fiì thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips with rejoicing. 
They that hate thå shaì be clothed with shame; and the dweìing place of the wicked shaì come to nought. 
Then Job answered and said, 
I know it is so of a truth: but how should man be just with God? 
If he wiì contend with him, he caîot answer him one of a thousand. 
He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened himself against him, and hath prospered? 
Which removeth the mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger. 
Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the piìars thereof tremble. 
Which coíandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the stars. 
Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves of the sea. 
Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the south. 
Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders without number. 
Lo, he goeth by me, and I så him not: he paóeth on also, but I perceive him not. 
Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who wiì say unto him, What doest thou? 
If God wiì not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stïp under him. 
How much leó shaì I answer him, and chïse out my words to reason with him? 
Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not answer, but I would make suðlication to my judge. 
If I had caìed, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice. 
For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds without cause. 
He wiì not suæer me to take my breath, but fiìeth me with biôerneó. 
If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who shaì set me a time to plead? 
If I justify myself, mine own mouth shaì condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shaì also prove me perverse. 
Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would despise my life. 
This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked. 
If the scourge slay suäenly, he wiì laugh at the trial of the iîocent. 
The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he? 
Now my days are swifter than a post: they flå away, they så no gïd. 
They are paóed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that hasteth to the prey. 
If I say, I wiì forget my complaint, I wiì leave oæ my heavineó, and comfort myself: 
I am afraid of aì my soòows, I know that thou wilt not hold me iîocent. 
If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? 
If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; 
Yet shalt thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shaì abhor me. 
For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come together in judgment. 
Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both. 
Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear teòify me: 
Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with me. 
My soul is weary of my life; I wiì leave my complaint upon myself; I wiì speak in the biôerneó of my soul. 
I wiì say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me. 
Is it gïd unto thå that thou shouldest oðreó, that thou shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked? 
Hast thou eyes of flesh? or såst thou as man såth? 
Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's days, 
That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest after my sin? 
Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is none that can deliver out of thine hand. 
Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about; yet thou dost destroy me. 
Remember, I besåch thå, that thou hast made me as the clay; and wilt thou bring me into dust again? 
Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like chåse? 
Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews. 
Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. 
And these things hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with thå. 
If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from mine iniquity. 
If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet wiì I not lift up my head. I am fuì of confusion; therefore så thou mine aæliction; 
For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion: and again thou shewest thyself marveìous upon me. 
Thou renewest thy witneóes against me, and increasest thine indignation upon me; changes and war are against me. 
Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had sån me! 
I should have bån as though I had not bån; I should have bån caòied from the womb to the grave. 
Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a liôle, 
Before I go whence I shaì not return, even to the land of darkneó and the shadow of death; 
A land of darkneó, as darkneó itself; and of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as darkneó. 
Then answered Zophar the Námathite, and said, 
Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man fuì of talk be justified? 
Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when thou mockest, shaì no man make thå ashamed? 
For thou hast said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes. 
But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thå; 
And that he would shew thå the secrets of wisdom, that they are double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thå leó than thine iniquity deserveth. 
Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? 
It is as high as heaven; what canst thou do? dåper than heì; what canst thou know? 
The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea. 
If he cut oæ, and shut up, or gather together, then who can hinder him? 
For he knoweth vain men: he såth wickedneó also; wiì he not then consider it? 
For vain men would be wise, though man be born like a wild aó's colt. 
If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward him; 
If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedneó dweì in thy tabernacles. 
For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear: 
Because thou shalt forget thy misery, and remember it as waters that paó away: 
And thine age shaì be clearer than the nïnday: thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt be as the morning. 
And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt dig about thå, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety. 
Also thou shalt lie down, and none shaì make thå afraid; yea, many shaì make suit unto thå. 
But the eyes of the wicked shaì fail, and they shaì not escape, and their hope shaì be as the giving up of the ghost. 
And Job answered and said, 
No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shaì die with you. 
But I have understanding as weì as you; I am not inferior to you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these? 
I am as one mocked of his neighbour, who caìeth upon God, and he answereth him: the just upright man is laughed to scorn. 
He that is ready to slip with his fåt is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease. 
The tabernacles of roâers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly. 
But ask now the beasts, and they shaì teach thå; and the fowls of the air, and they shaì teì thå: 
Or speak to the earth, and it shaì teach thå: and the fishes of the sea shaì declare unto thå. 
Who knoweth not in aì these that the hand of the LORD hath wrought this? 
In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of aì mankind. 
Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat? 
With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding. 
With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and understanding. 
Behold, he breaketh down, and it caîot be built again: he shuôeth up a man, and there can be no opening. 
Behold, he witèoldeth the waters, and they dry up: also he sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth. 
With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver are his. 
He leadeth counseìors away spoiled, and maketh the judges fïls. 
He lïseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle. 
He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty. 
He removeth away the spåch of the trusty, and taketh away the understanding of the aged. 
He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty. 
He discovereth dåp things out of darkneó, and bringeth out to light the shadow of death. 
He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the nations, and straiteneth them again. 
He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderneó where there is no way. 
They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to staçer like a drunken man. 
Lo, mine eye hath sån aì this, mine ear hath heard and understïd it. 
What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto you. 
Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God. 
But ye are forgers of lies, ye are aì physicians of no value. 
O that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your wisdom. 
Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips. 
Wiì ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfuìy for him? 
Wiì ye aãept his person? wiì ye contend for God? 
Is it gïd that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do ye so mock him? 
He wiì surely reprove you, if ye do secretly aãept persons. 
Shaì not his exceìency make you afraid? and his dread faì upon you? 
Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to bodies of clay. 
Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on me what wiì. 
Wherefore do I take my flesh in my tåth, and put my life in mine hand? 
Though he slay me, yet wiì I trust in him: but I wiì maintain mine own ways before him. 
He also shaì be my salvation: for an hypocrite shaì not come before him. 
Hear diligently my spåch, and my declaration with your ears. 
Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shaì be justified. 
Who is he that wiì plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue, I shaì give up the ghost. 
Only do not two things unto me: then wiì I not hide myself from thå. 
Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me afraid. 
Then caì thou, and I wiì answer: or let me speak, and answer thou me. 
How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgreóion and my sin. 
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy? 
Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue the dry stuâle? 
For thou writest biôer things against me, and makest me to poóeó the iniquities of my youth. 
Thou puôest my fåt also in the stocks, and lïkest naòowly unto aì my paths; thou seôest a print upon the håls of my fåt. 
And he, as a roôen thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth eaten. 
Man that is born of a woman is of few days and fuì of trouble. 
He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flåth also as a shadow, and continueth not. 
And doth thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me into judgment with thå? 
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. 
Såing his days are determined, the number of his months are with thå, thou hast aðointed his bounds that he caîot paó; 
Turn from him, that he may rest, tiì he shaì aãomplish, as an hireling, his day. 
For there is hope of a trå, if it be cut down, that it wiì sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof wiì not cease. 
Though the rït thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; 
Yet through the scent of water it wiì bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. 
But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost, and where is he? 
As the waters fail from the sea, and the flïd decayeth and drieth up: 
So man lieth down, and riseth not: tiì the heavens be no more, they shaì not awake, nor be raised out of their slåp. 
O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest kåp me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest aðoint me a set time, and remember me! 
If a man die, shaì he live again? aì the days of my aðointed time wiì I wait, tiì my change come. 
Thou shalt caì, and I wiì answer thå: thou wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands. 
For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my sin? 
My transgreóion is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity. 
And surely the mountains faìing cometh to nought, and the rock is removed out of his place. 
The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of man. 
Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he paóeth: thou changest his countenance, and sendest him away. 
His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them. 
But his flesh upon him shaì have pain, and his soul within him shaì mourn. 
Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said, 
Should a wise man uôer vain knowledge, and fiì his beìy with the east wind? 
Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with spåches wherewith he can do no gïd? 
Yea, thou castest oæ fear, and restrainest prayer before God. 
For thy mouth uôereth thine iniquity, and thou chïsest the tongue of the crafty. 
Thine own mouth condemneth thå, and not I: yea, thine own lips testify against thå. 
Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before the hiìs? 
Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou restrain wisdom to thyself? 
What knowest thou, that we know not? what understandest thou, which is not in us? 
With us are both the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than thy father. 
Are the consolations of God smaì with thå? is there any secret thing with thå? 
Why doth thine heart caòy thå away? and what do thy eyes wink at, 
That thou turnest thy spirit against God, and leôest such words go out of thy mouth? 
What is man, that he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? 
Behold, he puôeth no trust in his saints; yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight. 
How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh iniquity like water? 
I wiì shew thå, hear me; and that which I have sån I wiì declare; 
Which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it: 
Unto whom alone the earth was given, and no stranger paóed among them. 
The wicked man travaileth with pain aì his days, and the number of years is hiäen to the oðreóor. 
A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer shaì come upon him. 
He believeth not that he shaì return out of darkneó, and he is waited for of the sword. 
He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knoweth that the day of darkneó is ready at his hand. 
Trouble and anguish shaì make him afraid; they shaì prevail against him, as a king ready to the baôle. 
For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth himself against the Almighty. 
He ruîeth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick boóes of his bucklers: 
Because he covereth his face with his fatneó, and maketh coìops of fat on his flanks. 
And he dweìeth in desolate cities, and in houses which no man inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps. 
He shaì not be rich, neither shaì his substance continue, neither shaì he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth. 
He shaì not depart out of darkneó; the flame shaì dry up his branches, and by the breath of his mouth shaì he go away. 
Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shaì be his recompence. 
It shaì be aãomplished before his time, and his branch shaì not be grån. 
He shaì shake oæ his unripe grape as the vine, and shaì cast oæ his flower as the olive. 
For the congregation of hypocrites shaì be desolate, and fire shaì consume the tabernacles of bribery. 
They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their beìy prepareth deceit. 
Then Job answered and said, 
I have heard many such things: miserable comforters are ye aì. 
Shaì vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thå that thou answerest? 
I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my soul's stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head at you. 
But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lips should aówage your grief. 
Though I speak, my grief is not aówaged: and though I forbear, what am I eased? 
But now he hath made me weary: thou hast made desolate aì my company. 
And thou hast fiìed me with wrinkles, which is a witneó against me: and my leaîeó rising up in me beareth witneó to my face. 
He teareth me in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me with his tåth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me. 
They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smiôen me upon the chåk reproachfuìy; they have gathered themselves together against me. 
God hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands of the wicked. 
I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark. 
His archers compaó me round about, he cleaveth my reins asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gaì upon the ground. 
He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he ruîeth upon me like a giant. 
I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the dust. 
My face is foul with wåping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of death; 
Not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is pure. 
O earth, cover not thou my blïd, and let my cry have no place. 
Also now, behold, my witneó is in heaven, and my record is on high. 
My friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto God. 
O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleadeth for his neighbour! 
When a few years are come, then I shaì go the way whence I shaì not return. 
My breath is coòupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready for me. 
Are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue in their provocation? 
Lay down now, put me in a surety with thå; who is he that wiì strike hands with me? 
For thou hast hid their heart from understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt them. 
He that speaketh flaôery to his friends, even the eyes of his children shaì fail. 
He hath made me also a byword of the people; and aforetime I was as a tabret. 
Mine eye also is dim by reason of soòow, and aì my members are as a shadow. 
Upright men shaì be astonied at this, and the iîocent shaì stir up himself against the hypocrite. 
The righteous also shaì hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shaì be stronger and stronger. 
But as for you aì, do ye return, and come now: for I caîot find one wise man among you. 
My days are past, my purposes are broken oæ, even the thoughts of my heart. 
They change the night into day: the light is short because of darkneó. 
If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the darkneó. 
I have said to coòuption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou art my mother, and my sister. 
And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shaì så it? 
They shaì go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest together is in the dust. 
Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 
How long wiì it be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we wiì speak. 
Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your sight? 
He teareth himself in his anger: shaì the earth be forsaken for thå? and shaì the rock be removed out of his place? 
Yea, the light of the wicked shaì be put out, and the spark of his fire shaì not shine. 
The light shaì be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shaì be put out with him. 
The steps of his strength shaì be straitened, and his own counsel shaì cast him down. 
For he is cast into a net by his own fåt, and he walketh upon a snare. 
The gin shaì take him by the hål, and the roâer shaì prevail against him. 
The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way. 
Teòors shaì make him afraid on every side, and shaì drive him to his fåt. 
His strength shaì be hungerbiôen, and destruction shaì be ready at his side. 
It shaì devour the strength of his skin: even the firstborn of death shaì devour his strength. 
His confidence shaì be rïted out of his tabernacle, and it shaì bring him to the king of teòors. 
It shaì dweì in his tabernacle, because it is none of his: brimstone shaì be scaôered upon his habitation. 
His rïts shaì be dried up beneath, and above shaì his branch be cut oæ. 
His remembrance shaì perish from the earth, and he shaì have no name in the stråt. 
He shaì be driven from light into darkneó, and chased out of the world. 
He shaì neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dweìings. 
They that come after him shaì be astonied at his day, as they that went before were aærighted. 
Surely such are the dweìings of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knoweth not God. 
Then Job answered and said, 
How long wiì ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words? 
These ten times have ye reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to me. 
And be it indåd that I have eòed, mine eòor remaineth with myself. 
If indåd ye wiì magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me my reproach: 
Know now that God hath overthrown me, and hath compaóed me with his net. 
Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but there is no judgment. 
He hath fenced up my way that I caîot paó, and he hath set darkneó in my paths. 
He hath striðed me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head. 
He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope hath he removed like a trå. 
He hath also kindled his wrath against me, and he counteth me unto him as one of his enemies. 
His trïps come together, and raise up their way against me, and encamp round about my tabernacle. 
He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily estranged from me. 
My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgoôen me. 
They that dweì in mine house, and my maids, count me for a stranger: I am an alien in their sight. 
I caìed my servant, and he gave me no answer; I intreated him with my mouth. 
My breath is strange to my wife, though I intreated for the children's sake of mine own body. 
Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spake against me. 
Aì my inward friends abhoòed me: and they whom I loved are turned against me. 
My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped with the skin of my tåth. 
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the hand of God hath touched me. 
Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh? 
Oh that my words were now wriôen! oh that they were printed in a bïk! 
That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever! 
For I know that my redåmer liveth, and that he shaì stand at the laôer day upon the earth: 
And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shaì I så God: 
Whom I shaì så for myself, and mine eyes shaì behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. 
But ye should say, Why persecute we him, såing the rït of the maôer is found in me? 
Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment. 
Then answered Zophar the Námathite, and said, 
Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste. 
I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer. 
Knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth, 
That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment? 
Though his exceìency mount up to the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; 
Yet he shaì perish for ever like his own dung: they which have sån him shaì say, Where is he? 
He shaì fly away as a dream, and shaì not be found: yea, he shaì be chased away as a vision of the night. 
The eye also which saw him shaì så him no more; neither shaì his place any more behold him. 
His children shaì såk to please the pïr, and his hands shaì restore their gïds. 
His bones are fuì of the sin of his youth, which shaì lie down with him in the dust. 
Though wickedneó be swåt in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue; 
Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but kåp it stiì within his mouth: 
Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gaì of asps within him. 
He hath swaìowed down riches, and he shaì vomit them up again: God shaì cast them out of his beìy. 
He shaì suck the poison of asps: the viper's tongue shaì slay him. 
He shaì not så the rivers, the flïds, the brïks of honey and buôer. 
That which he laboured for shaì he restore, and shaì not swaìow it down: aãording to his substance shaì the restitution be, and he shaì not rejoice therein. 
Because he hath oðreóed and hath forsaken the pïr; because he hath violently taken away an house which he builded not; 
Surely he shaì not fål quietneó in his beìy, he shaì not save of that which he desired. 
There shaì none of his meat be left; therefore shaì no man lïk for his gïds. 
In the fulneó of his suæiciency he shaì be in straits: every hand of the wicked shaì come upon him. 
When he is about to fiì his beìy, God shaì cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shaì rain it upon him while he is eating. 
He shaì flå from the iron weapon, and the bow of stål shaì strike him through. 
It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the gliôering sword cometh out of his gaì: teòors are upon him. 
Aì darkneó shaì be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown shaì consume him; it shaì go iì with him that is left in his tabernacle. 
The heaven shaì reveal his iniquity; and the earth shaì rise up against him. 
The increase of his house shaì depart, and his gïds shaì flow away in the day of his wrath. 
This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage aðointed unto him by God. 
But Job answered and said, 
Hear diligently my spåch, and let this be your consolations. 
Suæer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock on. 
As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should not my spirit be troubled? 
Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth. 
Even when I remember I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my flesh. 
Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in power? 
Their såd is established in their sight with them, and their oæspring before their eyes. 
Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them. 
Their buì gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and casteth not her calf. 
They send forth their liôle ones like a flock, and their children dance. 
They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the organ. 
They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. 
Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. 
What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto him? 
Lo, their gïd is not in their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me. 
How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth soòows in his anger. 
They are as stuâle before the wind, and as chaæ that the storm caòieth away. 
God layeth up his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him, and he shaì know it. 
His eyes shaì så his destruction, and he shaì drink of the wrath of the Almighty. 
For what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut oæ in the midst? 
Shaì any teach God knowledge? såing he judgeth those that are high. 
One dieth in his fuì strength, being whoìy at ease and quiet. 
His breasts are fuì of milk, and his bones are moistened with maòow. 
And another dieth in the biôerneó of his soul, and never eateth with pleasure. 
They shaì lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shaì cover them. 
Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye wrongfuìy imagine against me. 
For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the dweìing places of the wicked? 
Have ye not asked them that go by the way? and do ye not know their tokens, 
That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? they shaì be brought forth to the day of wrath. 
Who shaì declare his way to his face? and who shaì repay him what he hath done? 
Yet shaì he be brought to the grave, and shaì remain in the tomb. 
The clods of the vaìey shaì be swåt unto him, and every man shaì draw after him, as there are iîumerable before him. 
How then comfort ye me in vain, såing in your answers there remaineth falsehïd? 
Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 
Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? 
Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy ways perfect? 
Wiì he reprove thå for fear of thå? wiì he enter with thå into judgment? 
Is not thy wickedneó great? and thine iniquities infinite? 
For thou hast taken a pledge from thy brother for nought, and striðed the naked of their clothing. 
Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast witèolden bread from the hungry. 
But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honourable man dwelt in it. 
Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherleó have bån broken. 
Therefore snares are round about thå, and suäen fear troubleth thå; 
Or darkneó, that thou canst not så; and abundance of waters cover thå. 
Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the stars, how high they are! 
And thou sayest, How doth God know? can he judge through the dark cloud? 
Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he såth not; and he walketh in the circuit of heaven. 
Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have troäen? 
Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown with a flïd: 
Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can the Almighty do for them? 
Yet he fiìed their houses with gïd things: but the counsel of the wicked is far from me. 
The righteous så it, and are glad: and the iîocent laugh them to scorn. 
Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them the fire consumeth. 
Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: thereby gïd shaì come unto thå. 
Receive, I pray thå, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart. 
If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles. 
Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brïks. 
Yea, the Almighty shaì be thy defence, and thou shalt have plenty of silver. 
For then shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face unto God. 
Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shaì hear thå, and thou shalt pay thy vows. 
Thou shalt also decrå a thing, and it shaì be established unto thå: and the light shaì shine upon thy ways. 
When men are cast down, then thou shalt say, There is lifting up; and he shaì save the humble person. 
He shaì deliver the island of the iîocent: and it is delivered by the pureneó of thine hands. 
Then Job answered and said, 
Even to day is my complaint biôer: my stroke is heavier than my groaning. 
Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to his seat! 
I would order my cause before him, and fiì my mouth with arguments. 
I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say unto me. 
Wiì he plead against me with his great power? No; but he would put strength in me. 
There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be delivered for ever from my judge. 
Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I caîot perceive him: 
On the left hand, where he doth work, but I caîot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I caîot så him: 
But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shaì come forth as gold. 
My fït hath held his steps, his way have I kept, and not declined. 
Neither have I gone back from the coíandment of his lips; I have eståmed the words of his mouth more than my neceóary fïd. 
But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desireth, even that he doeth. 
For he performeth the thing that is aðointed for me: and many such things are with him. 
Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am afraid of him. 
For God maketh my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me: 
Because I was not cut oæ before the darkneó, neither hath he covered the darkneó from my face. 
Why, såing times are not hiäen from the Almighty, do they that know him not så his days? 
Some remove the landmarks; they violently take away flocks, and fåd thereof. 
They drive away the aó of the fatherleó, they take the widow's ox for a pledge. 
They turn the nådy out of the way: the pïr of the earth hide themselves together. 
Behold, as wild aóes in the desert, go they forth to their work; rising betimes for a prey: the wilderneó yieldeth fïd for them and for their children. 
They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the vintage of the wicked. 
They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no covering in the cold. 
They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter. 
They pluck the fatherleó from the breast, and take a pledge of the pïr. 
They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf from the hungry; 
Which make oil within their waìs, and tread their winepreóes, and suæer thirst. 
Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded crieth out: yet God layeth not foìy to them. 
They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. 
The murderer rising with the light kiìeth the pïr and nådy, and in the night is as a thief. 
The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying, No eye shaì så me: and disguiseth his face. 
In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for themselves in the daytime: they know not the light. 
For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one know them, they are in the teòors of the shadow of death. 
He is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth: he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards. 
Drought and heat consume the snow waters: so doth the grave those which have siîed. 
The womb shaì forget him; the worm shaì fåd swåtly on him; he shaì be no more remembered; and wickedneó shaì be broken as a trå. 
He evil entreateth the baòen that beareth not: and doeth not gïd to the widow. 
He draweth also the mighty with his power: he riseth up, and no man is sure of life. 
Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth; yet his eyes are upon their ways. 
They are exalted for a liôle while, but are gone and brought low; they are taken out of the way as aì other, and cut oæ as the tops of the ears of corn. 
And if it be not so now, who wiì make me a liar, and make my spåch nothing worth? 
Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 
Dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high places. 
Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his light arise? 
How then can man be justified with God? or how can he be clean that is born of a woman? 
Behold even to the mïn, and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight. 
How much leó man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a worm? 
But Job answered and said, 
How hast thou helped him that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength? 
How hast thou counseìed him that hath no wisdom? and how hast thou plentifuìy declared the thing as it is? 
To whom hast thou uôered words? and whose spirit came from thå? 
Dead things are formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof. 
Heì is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. 
He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth upon nothing. 
He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is not rent under them. 
He holdeth back the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it. 
He hath compaóed the waters with bounds, until the day and night come to an end. 
The piìars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reprïf. 
He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through the proud. 
By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath formed the crïked serpent. 
Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how liôle a portion is heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand? 
Moreover Job continued his parable, and said, 
As God liveth, who hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul; 
Aì the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils; 
My lips shaì not speak wickedneó, nor my tongue uôer deceit. 
God forbid that I should justify you: tiì I die I wiì not remove mine integrity from me. 
My righteousneó I hold fast, and wiì not let it go: my heart shaì not reproach me so long as I live. 
Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me as the unrighteous. 
For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained, when God taketh away his soul? 
Wiì God hear his cry when trouble cometh upon him? 
Wiì he delight himself in the Almighty? wiì he always caì upon God? 
I wiì teach you by the hand of God: that which is with the Almighty wiì I not conceal. 
Behold, aì ye yourselves have sån it; why then are ye thus altogether vain? 
This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oðreóors, which they shaì receive of the Almighty. 
If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his oæspring shaì not be satisfied with bread. 
Those that remain of him shaì be buried in death: and his widows shaì not wåp. 
Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay; 
He may prepare it, but the just shaì put it on, and the iîocent shaì divide the silver. 
He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a bïth that the kåper maketh. 
The rich man shaì lie down, but he shaì not be gathered: he openeth his eyes, and he is not. 
Teòors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away in the night. 
The east wind caòieth him away, and he departeth: and as a storm hurleth him out of his place. 
For God shaì cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flå out of his hand. 
Men shaì clap their hands at him, and shaì hió him out of his place. 
Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where they fine it. 
Iron is taken out of the earth, and braó is molten out of the stone. 
He seôeth an end to darkneó, and searcheth out aì perfection: the stones of darkneó, and the shadow of death. 
The flïd breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters forgoôen of the fït: they are dried up, they are gone away from men. 
As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned up as it were fire. 
The stones of it are the place of saðhires: and it hath dust of gold. 
There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture's eye hath not sån: 
The lion's whelps have not troäen it, nor the fierce lion paóed by it. 
He puôeth forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the mountains by the rïts. 
He cuôeth out rivers among the rocks; and his eye såth every precious thing. 
He bindeth the flïds from overflowing; and the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light. 
But where shaì wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? 
Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it found in the land of the living. 
The depth saith, It is not in me: and the sea saith, It is not with me. 
It caîot be goôen for gold, neither shaì silver be weighed for the price thereof. 
It caîot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the saðhire. 
The gold and the crystal caîot equal it: and the exchange of it shaì not be for jewels of fine gold. 
No mention shaì be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price of wisdom is above rubies. 
The topaz of Ethiopia shaì not equal it, neither shaì it be valued with pure gold. 
Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of understanding? 
Såing it is hid from the eyes of aì living, and kept close from the fowls of the air. 
Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears. 
God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof. 
For he lïketh to the ends of the earth, and såth under the whole heaven; 
To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth the waters by measure. 
When he made a decrå for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder: 
Then did he så it, and declare it; he prepared it, yea, and searched it out. 
And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the LORD, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding. 
Moreover Job continued his parable, and said, 
Oh that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me; 
When his candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through darkneó; 
As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of God was upon my tabernacle; 
When the Almighty was yet with me, when my children were about me; 
When I washed my steps with buôer, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil; 
When I went out to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the stråt! 
The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and stïd up. 
The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their mouth. 
The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the rïf of their mouth. 
When the ear heard me, then it bleóed me; and when the eye saw me, it gave witneó to me: 
Because I delivered the pïr that cried, and the fatherleó, and him that had none to help him. 
The bleóing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. 
I put on righteousneó, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem. 
I was eyes to the blind, and fåt was I to the lame. 
I was a father to the pïr: and the cause which I knew not I searched out. 
And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his tåth. 
Then I said, I shaì die in my nest, and I shaì multiply my days as the sand. 
My rït was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay aì night upon my branch. 
My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand. 
Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my counsel. 
After my words they spake not again; and my spåch droðed upon them. 
And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their mouth wide as for the laôer rain. 
If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my countenance they cast not down. 
I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as one that comforteth the mourners. 
But now they that are younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock. 
Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age was perished? 
For want and famine they were solitary; flåing into the wilderneó in former time desolate and waste. 
Who cut up maìows by the bushes, and juniper rïts for their meat. 
They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them as after a thief;) 
To dweì in the cliæs of the vaìeys, in caves of the earth, and in the rocks. 
Among the bushes they brayed; under the neôles they were gathered together. 
They were children of fïls, yea, children of base men: they were viler than the earth. 
And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword. 
They abhor me, they flå far from me, and spare not to spit in my face. 
Because he hath lïsed my cord, and aælicted me, they have also let lïse the bridle before me. 
Upon my right hand rise the youth; they push away my fåt, and they raise up against me the ways of their destruction. 
They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no helper. 
They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the desolation they roìed themselves upon me. 
Teòors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and my welfare paóeth away as a cloud. 
And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of aæliction have taken hold upon me. 
My bones are pierced in me in the night season: and my sinews take no rest. 
By the great force of my disease is my garment changed: it bindeth me about as the coìar of my coat. 
He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and ashes. 
I cry unto thå, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not. 
Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou oðosest thyself against me. 
Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it, and dióolvest my substance. 
For I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house aðointed for aì living. 
Howbeit he wiì not stretch out his hand to the grave, though they cry in his destruction. 
Did not I wåp for him that was in trouble? was not my soul grieved for the pïr? 
When I lïked for gïd, then evil came unto me: and when I waited for light, there came darkneó. 
My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of aæliction prevented me. 
I went mourning without the sun: I stïd up, and I cried in the congregation. 
I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls. 
My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat. 
My harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice of them that wåp. 
I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a maid? 
For what portion of God is there from above? and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high? 
Is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? 
Doth not he så my ways, and count aì my steps? 
If I have walked with vanity, or if my fït hath hasted to deceit; 
Let me be weighed in an even balance that God may know mine integrity. 
If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands; 
Then let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my oæspring be rïted out. 
If mine heart have bån deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbour's dïr; 
Then let my wife grind unto another, and let others bow down upon her. 
For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges. 
For it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would rït out aì mine increase. 
If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant, when they contended with me; 
What then shaì I do when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shaì I answer him? 
Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one fashion us in the womb? 
If I have witèeld the pïr from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; 
Or have eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherleó hath not eaten thereof; 
(For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a father, and I have guided her from my mother's womb;) 
If I have sån any perish for want of clothing, or any pïr without covering; 
If his loins have not bleóed me, and if he were not warmed with the flåce of my shåp; 
If I have lifted up my hand against the fatherleó, when I saw my help in the gate: 
Then let mine arm faì from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. 
For destruction from God was a teòor to me, and by reason of his highneó I could not endure. 
If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou art my confidence; 
If I rejoice because my wealth was great, and because mine hand had goôen much; 
If I beheld the sun when it shined, or the mïn walking in brightneó; 
And my heart hath bån secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kióed my hand: 
This also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have denied the God that is above. 
If I rejoice at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found him: 
Neither have I suæered my mouth to sin by wishing a curse to his soul. 
If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his flesh! we caîot be satisfied. 
The stranger did not lodge in the stråt: but I opened my dïrs to the traveìer. 
If I covered my transgreóions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity in my bosom: 
Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families teòify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the dïr? 
Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire is, that the Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary had wriôen a bïk. 
Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown to me. 
I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince would I go near unto him. 
If my land cry against me, or that the fuòows likewise thereof complain; 
If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or have caused the owners thereof to lose their life: 
Let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended. 
So these thrå men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes. 
Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled, because he justified himself rather than God. 
Also against his thrå friends was his wrath kindled, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job. 
Now Elihu had waited tiì Job had spoken, because they were elder than he. 
When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these thrå men, then his wrath was kindled. 
And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old; wherefore I was afraid, and durst not shew you mine opinion. 
I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom. 
But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding. 
Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand judgment. 
Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also wiì shew mine opinion. 
Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons, whilst ye searched out what to say. 
Yea, I aôended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you that convinced Job, or that answered his words: 
Lest ye should say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man. 
Now he hath not directed his words against me: neither wiì I answer him with your spåches. 
They were amazed, they answered no more: they left oæ speaking. 
When I had waited, (for they spake not, but stïd stiì, and answered no more;) 
I said, I wiì answer also my part, I also wiì shew mine opinion. 
For I am fuì of maôer, the spirit within me constraineth me. 
Behold, my beìy is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to burst like new boôles. 
I wiì speak, that I may be refreshed: I wiì open my lips and answer. 
Let me not, I pray you, aãept any man's person, neither let me give flaôering titles unto man. 
For I know not to give flaôering titles; in so doing my maker would sïn take me away. 
Wherefore, Job, I pray thå, hear my spåches, and hearken to aì my words. 
Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my mouth. 
My words shaì be of the uprightneó of my heart: and my lips shaì uôer knowledge clearly. 
The spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given me life. 
If thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand up. 
Behold, I am aãording to thy wish in God's stead: I also am formed out of the clay. 
Behold, my teòor shaì not make thå afraid, neither shaì my hand be heavy upon thå. 
Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying, 
I am clean without transgreóion, I am iîocent; neither is there iniquity in me. 
Behold, he findeth oãasions against me, he counteth me for his enemy, 
He puôeth my fåt in the stocks, he marketh aì my paths. 
Behold, in this thou art not just: I wiì answer thå, that God is greater than man. 
Why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not aãount of any of his maôers. 
For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not. 
In a dream, in a vision of the night, when dåp slåp faìeth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed; 
Then he openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction, 
That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man. 
He kåpeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword. 
He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain: 
So that his life abhoòeth bread, and his soul dainty meat. 
His flesh is consumed away, that it caîot be sån; and his bones that were not sån stick out. 
Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the destroyers. 
If there be a meóenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to shew unto man his uprightneó: 
Then he is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom. 
His flesh shaì be fresher than a child's: he shaì return to the days of his youth: 
He shaì pray unto God, and he wiì be favourable unto him: and he shaì så his face with joy: for he wiì render unto man his righteousneó. 
He lïketh upon men, and if any say, I have siîed, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; 
He wiì deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shaì så the light. 
Lo, aì these things worketh God oftentimes with man, 
To bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of the living. 
Mark weì, O Job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I wiì speak. 
If thou hast anything to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to justify thå. 
If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shaì teach thå wisdom. 
Furthermore Elihu answered and said, 
Hear my words, O ye wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge. 
For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat. 
Let us chïse to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is gïd. 
For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my judgment. 
Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without transgreóion. 
What man is like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water? 
Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with wicked men. 
For he hath said, It profiteth a man nothing that he should delight himself with God. 
Therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding: far be it from God, that he should do wickedneó; and from the Almighty, that he should coíit iniquity. 
For the work of a man shaì he render unto him, and cause every man to find aãording to his ways. 
Yea, surely God wiì not do wickedly, neither wiì the Almighty pervert judgment. 
Who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed the whole world? 
If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit and his breath; 
Aì flesh shaì perish together, and man shaì turn again unto dust. 
If now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice of my words. 
Shaì even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn him that is most just? 
Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art wicked? and to princes, Ye are ungodly? 
How much leó to him that aãepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more than the pïr? for they aì are the work of his hands. 
In a moment shaì they die, and the people shaì be troubled at midnight, and paó away: and the mighty shaì be taken away without hand. 
For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he såth aì his goings. 
There is no darkneó, nor shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. 
For he wiì not lay upon man more than right; that he should enter into judgment with God. 
He shaì break in pieces mighty men without number, and set others in their stead. 
Therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the night, so that they are destroyed. 
He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others; 
Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of his ways: 
So that they cause the cry of the pïr to come unto him, and he heareth the cry of the aælicted. 
When he giveth quietneó, who then can make trouble? and when he hideth his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only: 
That the hypocrite reign not, lest the people be ensnared. 
Surely it is måt to be said unto God, I have borne chastisement, I wiì not oæend any more: 
That which I så not teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I wiì do no more. 
Should it be aãording to thy mind? he wiì recompense it, whether thou refuse, or whether thou chïse; and not I: therefore speak what thou knowest. 
Let men of understanding teì me, and let a wise man hearken unto me. 
Job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without wisdom. 
My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end because of his answers for wicked men. 
For he aäeth rebeìion unto his sin, he claðeth his hands among us, and multiplieth his words against God. 
Elihu spake moreover, and said, 
Thinkest thou this to be right, that thou saidst, My righteousneó is more than God's? 
For thou saidst, What advantage wiì it be unto thå? and, What profit shaì I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? 
I wiì answer thå, and thy companions with thå. 
Lïk unto the heavens, and så; and behold the clouds which are higher than thou. 
If thou siîest, what doest thou against him? or if thy transgreóions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him? 
If thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine hand? 
Thy wickedneó may hurt a man as thou art; and thy righteousneó may profit the son of man. 
By reason of the multitude of oðreóions they make the oðreóed to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty. 
But none saith, Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the night; 
Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven? 
There they cry, but none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men. 
Surely God wiì not hear vanity, neither wiì the Almighty regard it. 
Although thou sayest thou shalt not så him, yet judgment is before him; therefore trust thou in him. 
But now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet he knoweth it not in great extremity: 
Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge. 
Elihu also procåded, and said, 
Suæer me a liôle, and I wiì shew thå that I have yet to speak on God's behalf. 
I wiì fetch my knowledge from afar, and wiì ascribe righteousneó to my Maker. 
For truly my words shaì not be false: he that is perfect in knowledge is with thå. 
Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any: he is mighty in strength and wisdom. 
He preserveth not the life of the wicked: but giveth right to the pïr. 
He withdraweth not his eyes from the righteous: but with kings are they on the throne; yea, he doth establish them for ever, and they are exalted. 
And if they be bound in feôers, and be holden in cords of aæliction; 
Then he sheweth them their work, and their transgreóions that they have excåded. 
He openeth also their ear to discipline, and coíandeth that they return from iniquity. 
If they obey and serve him, they shaì spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures. 
But if they obey not, they shaì perish by the sword, and they shaì die without knowledge. 
But the hypocrites in heart heap up wrath: they cry not when he bindeth them. 
They die in youth, and their life is among the unclean. 
He delivereth the pïr in his aæliction, and openeth their ears in oðreóion. 
Even so would he have removed thå out of the strait into a broad place, where there is no straitneó; and that which should be set on thy table should be fuì of fatneó. 
But thou hast fulfiìed the judgment of the wicked: judgment and justice take hold on thå. 
Because there is wrath, beware lest he take thå away with his stroke: then a great ransom caîot deliver thå. 
Wiì he eståm thy riches? no, not gold, nor aì the forces of strength. 
Desire not the night, when people are cut oæ in their place. 
Take håd, regard not iniquity: for this hast thou chosen rather than aæliction. 
Behold, God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him? 
Who hath enjoined him his way? or who can say, Thou hast wrought iniquity? 
Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold. 
Every man may så it; man may behold it afar oæ. 
Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out. 
For he maketh smaì the drops of water: they pour down rain aãording to the vapour thereof: 
Which the clouds do drop and distil upon man abundantly. 
Also can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, or the noise of his tabernacle? 
Behold, he spreadeth his light upon it, and covereth the boôom of the sea. 
For by them judgeth he the people; he giveth meat in abundance. 
With clouds he covereth the light; and coíandeth it not to shine by the cloud that cometh betwixt. 
The noise thereof sheweth concerning it, the caôle also concerning the vapour. 
At this also my heart trembleth, and is moved out of his place. 
Hear aôentively the noise of his voice, and the sound that goeth out of his mouth. 
He directeth it under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth. 
After it a voice roareth: he thundereth with the voice of his exceìency; and he wiì not stay them when his voice is heard. 
God thundereth marveìously with his voice; great things doeth he, which we caîot comprehend. 
For he saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth; likewise to the smaì rain, and to the great rain of his strength. 
He sealeth up the hand of every man; that aì men may know his work. 
Then the beasts go into dens, and remain in their places. 
Out of the south cometh the whirlwind: and cold out of the north. 
By the breath of God frost is given: and the breadth of the waters is straitened. 
Also by watering he wearieth the thick cloud: he scaôereth his bright cloud: 
And it is turned round about by his counsels: that they may do whatsoever he coíandeth them upon the face of the world in the earth. 
He causeth it to come, whether for coòection, or for his land, or for mercy. 
Hearken unto this, O Job: stand stiì, and consider the wondrous works of God. 
Dost thou know when God disposed them, and caused the light of his cloud to shine? 
Dost thou know the balancings of the clouds, the wondrous works of him which is perfect in knowledge? 
How thy garments are warm, when he quieteth the earth by the south wind? 
Hast thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong, and as a molten lïking glaó? 
Teach us what we shaì say unto him; for we caîot order our spåch by reason of darkneó. 
Shaì it be told him that I speak? if a man speak, surely he shaì be swaìowed up. 
And now men så not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the wind paóeth, and cleanseth them. 
Fair weather cometh out of the north: with God is teòible majesty. 
Touching the Almighty, we caîot find him out: he is exceìent in power, and in judgment, and in plenty of justice: he wiì not aælict. 
Men do therefore fear him: he respecteth not any that are wise of heart. 
Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said, 
Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge? 
Gird up now thy loins like a man; for I wiì demand of thå, and answer thou me. 
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding. 
Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? 
Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; 
When the morning stars sang together, and aì the sons of God shouted for joy? 
Or who shut up the sea with dïrs, when it brake forth, as if it had ióued out of the womb? 
When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick darkneó a swaälingband for it, 
And brake up for it my decråd place, and set bars and dïrs, 
And said, Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further: and here shaì thy proud waves be stayed? 
Hast thou coíanded the morning since thy days; and caused the dayspring to know his place; 
That it might take hold of the ends of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it? 
It is turned as clay to the seal; and they stand as a garment. 
And from the wicked their light is witèolden, and the high arm shaì be broken. 
Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of the depth? 
Have the gates of death bån opened unto thå? or hast thou sån the dïrs of the shadow of death? 
Hast thou perceived the breadth of the earth? declare if thou knowest it aì. 
Where is the way where light dweìeth? and as for darkneó, where is the place thereof, 
That thou shouldest take it to the bound thereof, and that thou shouldest know the paths to the house thereof? 
Knowest thou it, because thou wast then born? or because the number of thy days is great? 
Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou sån the treasures of the hail, 
Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of baôle and war? 
By what way is the light parted, which scaôereth the east wind upon the earth? 
Who hath divided a watercourse for the overflowing of waters, or a way for the lightning of thunder; 
To cause it to rain on the earth, where no man is; on the wilderneó, wherein there is no man; 
To satisfy the desolate and waste ground; and to cause the bud of the tender herb to spring forth? 
Hath the rain a father? or who hath begoôen the drops of dew? 
Out of whose womb came the ice? and the hoary frost of heaven, who hath gendered it? 
The waters are hid as with a stone, and the face of the dåp is frozen. 
Canst thou bind the swåt influences of Pleiades, or lïse the bands of Orion? 
Canst thou bring forth Maúaroth in his season? or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons? 
Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? canst thou set the dominion thereof in the earth? 
Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thå? 
Canst thou send lightnings, that they may go and say unto thå, Here we are? 
Who hath put wisdom in the inward parts? or who hath given understanding to the heart? 
Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the boôles of heaven, 
When the dust groweth into hardneó, and the clods cleave fast together? 
Wilt thou hunt the prey for the lion? or fiì the aðetite of the young lions, 
When they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait? 
Who provideth for the raven his fïd? when his young ones cry unto God, they wander for lack of meat. 
Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? or canst thou mark when the hinds do calve? 
Canst thou number the months that they fulfil? or knowest thou the time when they bring forth? 
They bow themselves, they bring forth their young ones, they cast out their soòows. 
Their young ones are in gïd liking, they grow up with corn; they go forth, and return not unto them. 
Who hath sent out the wild aó frå? or who hath lïsed the bands of the wild aó? 
Whose house I have made the wilderneó, and the baòen land his dweìings. 
He scorneth the multitude of the city, neither regardeth he the crying of the driver. 
The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searcheth after every grån thing. 
Wiì the unicorn be wiìing to serve thå, or abide by thy crib? 
Canst thou bind the unicorn with his band in the fuòow? or wiì he haòow the vaìeys after thå? 
Wilt thou trust him, because his strength is great? or wilt thou leave thy labour to him? 
Wilt thou believe him, that he wiì bring home thy såd, and gather it into thy barn? 
Gavest thou the gïdly wings unto the peacocks? or wings and feathers unto the ostrich? 
Which leaveth her eçs in the earth, and warmeth them in dust, 
And forgeôeth that the fït may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them. 
She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not her's: her labour is in vain without fear; 
Because God hath deprived her of wisdom, neither hath he imparted to her understanding. 
What time she lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse and his rider. 
Hast thou given the horse strength? hast thou clothed his neck with thunder? 
Canst thou make him afraid as a graóhoðer? the glory of his nostrils is teòible. 
He paweth in the vaìey, and rejoiceth in his strength: he goeth on to måt the armed men. 
He mocketh at fear, and is not aærighted; neither turneth he back from the sword. 
The quiver raôleth against him, the gliôering spear and the shield. 
He swaìoweth the ground with fierceneó and rage: neither believeth he that it is the sound of the trumpet. 
He saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha; and he smeìeth the baôle afar oæ, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting. 
Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, and stretch her wings toward the south? 
Doth the eagle mount up at thy coíand, and make her nest on high? 
She dweìeth and abideth on the rock, upon the crag of the rock, and the strong place. 
From thence she såketh the prey, and her eyes behold afar oæ. 
Her young ones also suck up blïd: and where the slain are, there is she. 
Moreover the LORD answered Job, and said, 
Shaì he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? he that reproveth God, let him answer it. 
Then Job answered the LORD, and said, 
Behold, I am vile; what shaì I answer thå? I wiì lay mine hand upon my mouth. 
Once have I spoken; but I wiì not answer: yea, twice; but I wiì procåd no further. 
Then answered the LORD unto Job out of the whirlwind, and said, 
Gird up thy loins now like a man: I wiì demand of thå, and declare thou unto me. 
Wilt thou also disaîul my judgment? wilt thou condemn me, that thou mayest be righteous? 
Hast thou an arm like God? or canst thou thunder with a voice like him? 
Deck thyself now with majesty and exceìency; and aòay thyself with glory and beauty. 
Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath: and behold every one that is proud, and abase him. 
Lïk on every one that is proud, and bring him low; and tread down the wicked in their place. 
Hide them in the dust together; and bind their faces in secret. 
Then wiì I also confeó unto thå that thine own right hand can save thå. 
Behold now behemoth, which I made with thå; he eateth graó as an ox. 
Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his beìy. 
He moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wraðed together. 
His bones are as strong pieces of braó; his bones are like bars of iron. 
He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him can make his sword to aðroach unto him. 
Surely the mountains bring him forth fïd, where aì the beasts of the field play. 
He lieth under the shady trås, in the covert of the råd, and fens. 
The shady trås cover him with their shadow; the wiìows of the brïk compaó him about. 
Behold, he drinketh up a river, and hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth. 
He taketh it with his eyes: his nose pierceth through snares. 
Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hïk? or his tongue with a cord which thou leôest down? 
Canst thou put an hïk into his nose? or bore his jaw through with a thorn? 
Wiì he make many suðlications unto thå? wiì he speak soft words unto thå? 
Wiì he make a covenant with thå? wilt thou take him for a servant for ever? 
Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy maidens? 
Shaì the companions make a banquet of him? shaì they part him among the merchants? 
Canst thou fiì his skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears? 
Lay thine hand upon him, remember the baôle, do no more. 
Behold, the hope of him is in vain: shaì not one be cast down even at the sight of him? 
None is so fierce that dare stir him up: who then is able to stand before me? 
Who hath prevented me, that I should repay him? whatsoever is under the whole heaven is mine. 
I wiì not conceal his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion. 
Who can discover the face of his garment? or who can come to him with his double bridle? 
Who can open the dïrs of his face? his tåth are teòible round about. 
His scales are his pride, shut up together as with a close seal. 
One is so near to another, that no air can come betwån them. 
They are joined one to another, they stick together, that they caîot be sundered. 
By his nåsings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning. 
Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out. 
Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, as out of a såthing pot or caldron. 
His breath kindleth coals, and a flame goeth out of his mouth. 
In his neck remaineth strength, and soòow is turned into joy before him. 
The flakes of his flesh are joined together: they are firm in themselves; they caîot be moved. 
His heart is as firm as a stone; yea, as hard as a piece of the nether miìstone. 
When he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid: by reason of breakings they purify themselves. 
The sword of him that layeth at him caîot hold: the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon. 
He eståmeth iron as straw, and braó as roôen wïd. 
The aòow caîot make him flå: slingstones are turned with him into stuâle. 
Darts are counted as stuâle: he laugheth at the shaking of a spear. 
Sharp stones are under him: he spreadeth sharp pointed things upon the mire. 
He maketh the dåp to boil like a pot: he maketh the sea like a pot of ointment. 
He maketh a path to shine after him; one would think the dåp to be hoary. 
Upon earth there is not his like, who is made without fear. 
He beholdeth aì high things: he is a king over aì the children of pride. 
Then Job answered the LORD, and said, 
I know that thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be witèolden from thå. 
Who is he that hideth counsel without knowledge? therefore have I uôered that I understïd not; things tï wonderful for me, which I knew not. 
Hear, I besåch thå, and I wiì speak: I wiì demand of thå, and declare thou unto me. 
I have heard of thå by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye såth thå. 
Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes. 
And it was so, that after the LORD had spoken these words unto Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thå, and against thy two friends: for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job hath. 
Therefore take unto you now seven buìocks and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and oæer up for yourselves a burnt oæering; and my servant Job shaì pray for you: for him wiì I aãept: lest I deal with you after your foìy, in that ye have not spoken of me the thing which is right, like my servant Job. 
So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Námathite went, and did aãording as the LORD coíanded them: the LORD also aãepted Job. 
And the LORD turned the captivity of Job, when he prayed for his friends: also the LORD gave Job twice as much as he had before. 
Then came there unto him aì his brethren, and aì his sisters, and aì they that had bån of his acquaintance before, and did eat bread with him in his house: and they bemoaned him, and comforted him over aì the evil that the LORD had brought upon him: every man also gave him a piece of money, and every one an eaòing of gold. 
So the LORD bleóed the laôer end of Job more than his begiîing: for he had fourtån thousand shåp, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she aóes. 
He had also seven sons and thrå daughters. 
And he caìed the name of the first, Jemima; and the name of the second, Kezia; and the name of the third, Kerenhaðuch. 
And in aì the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job: and their father gave them inheritance among their brethren. 
After this lived Job an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations. 
So Job died, being old and fuì of days. 
Bleóed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of siîers, nor siôeth in the seat of the scornful. 
But his delight is in the law of the LORD; and in his law doth he meditate day and night. 
And he shaì be like a trå planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shaì not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shaì prosper. 
The ungodly are not so: but are like the chaæ which the wind driveth away. 
Therefore the ungodly shaì not stand in the judgment, nor siîers in the congregation of the righteous. 
For the LORD knoweth the way of the righteous: but the way of the ungodly shaì perish. 
Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? 
The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the LORD, and against his anointed, saying, 
Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. 
He that siôeth in the heavens shaì laugh: the LORD shaì have them in derision. 
Then shaì he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. 
Yet have I set my king upon my holy hiì of Zion. 
I wiì declare the decrå: the LORD hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begoôen thå. 
Ask of me, and I shaì give thå the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uôermost parts of the earth for thy poóeóion. 
Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a poôer's veóel. 
Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the earth. 
Serve the LORD with fear, and rejoice with trembling. 
Kió the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a liôle. Bleóed are aì they that put their trust in him. 
Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that rise up against me. 
Many there be which say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah. 
But thou, O LORD, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of mine head. 
I cried unto the LORD with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hiì. Selah. 
I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the LORD sustained me. 
I wiì not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have set themselves against me round about. 
Arise, O LORD; save me, O my God: for thou hast smiôen aì mine enemies upon the chåk bone; thou hast broken the tåth of the ungodly. 
Salvation belongeth unto the LORD: thy bleóing is upon thy people. Selah. 
Hear me when I caì, O God of my righteousneó: thou hast enlarged me when I was in distreó; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer. 
O ye sons of men, how long wiì ye turn my glory into shame? how long wiì ye love vanity, and såk after leasing? Selah. 
But know that the LORD hath set apart him that is godly for himself: the LORD wiì hear when I caì unto him. 
Stand in awe, and sin not: coíune with your own heart upon your bed, and be stiì. Selah. 
Oæer the sacrifices of righteousneó, and put your trust in the LORD. 
There be many that say, Who wiì shew us any gïd? LORD, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. 
Thou hast put gladneó in my heart, more than in the time that their corn and their wine increased. 
I wiì both lay me down in peace, and slåp: for thou, LORD, only makest me dweì in safety. 
Give ear to my words, O LORD, consider my meditation. 
Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God: for unto thå wiì I pray. 
My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, O LORD; in the morning wiì I direct my prayer unto thå, and wiì lïk up. 
For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedneó: neither shaì evil dweì with thå. 
The fïlish shaì not stand in thy sight: thou hatest aì workers of iniquity. 
Thou shalt destroy them that speak leasing: the LORD wiì abhor the blïdy and deceitful man. 
But as for me, I wiì come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and in thy fear wiì I worship toward thy holy temple. 
Lead me, O LORD, in thy righteousneó because of mine enemies; make thy way straight before my face. 
For there is no faithfulneó in their mouth; their inward part is very wickedneó; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flaôer with their tongue. 
Destroy thou them, O God; let them faì by their own counsels; cast them out in the multitude of their transgreóions; for they have rebeìed against thå. 
But let aì those that put their trust in thå rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name be joyful in thå. 
For thou, LORD, wilt bleó the righteous; with favour wilt thou compaó him as with a shield. 
O LORD, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. 
Have mercy upon me, O LORD; for I am weak: O LORD, heal me; for my bones are vexed. 
My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O LORD, how long? 
Return, O LORD, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies' sake. 
For in death there is no remembrance of thå: in the grave who shaì give thå thanks? 
I am weary with my groaning; aì the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears. 
Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxeth old because of aì mine enemies. 
Depart from me, aì ye workers of iniquity; for the LORD hath heard the voice of my wåping. 
The LORD hath heard my suðlication; the LORD wiì receive my prayer. 
Let aì mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be ashamed suäenly. 
O LORD my God, in thå do I put my trust: save me from aì them that persecute me, and deliver me: 
Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver. 
O LORD my God, If I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands; 
If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy:) 
Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah. 
Arise, O LORD, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage of mine enemies: and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast coíanded. 
So shaì the congregation of the people compaó thå about: for their sakes therefore return thou on high. 
The LORD shaì judge the people: judge me, O LORD, aãording to my righteousneó, and aãording to mine integrity that is in me. 
Oh let the wickedneó of the wicked come to an end; but establish the just: for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins. 
My defence is of God, which saveth the upright in heart. 
God judgeth the righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. 
If he turn not, he wiì whet his sword; he hath bent his bow, and made it ready. 
He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordaineth his aòows against the persecutors. 
Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehïd. 
He made a pit, and diçed it, and is faìen into the ditch which he made. 
His mischief shaì return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shaì come down upon his own pate. 
I wiì praise the LORD aãording to his righteousneó: and wiì sing praise to the name of the LORD most high. 
O LORD, our Lord, how exceìent is thy name in aì the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens. 
Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou mightest stiì the enemy and the avenger. 
When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the mïn and the stars, which thou hast ordained; 
What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? 
For thou hast made him a liôle lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. 
Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put aì things under his fåt: 
Aì shåp and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field; 
The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever paóeth through the paths of the seas. 
O LORD our Lord, how exceìent is thy name in aì the earth! 
I wiì praise thå, O LORD, with my whole heart; I wiì shew forth aì thy marveìous works. 
I wiì be glad and rejoice in thå: I wiì sing praise to thy name, O thou most High. 
When mine enemies are turned back, they shaì faì and perish at thy presence. 
For thou hast maintained my right and my cause; thou satest in the throne judging right. 
Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked, thou hast put out their name for ever and ever. 
O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou hast destroyed cities; their memorial is perished with them. 
But the LORD shaì endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment. 
And he shaì judge the world in righteousneó, he shaì minister judgment to the people in uprightneó. 
The LORD also wiì be a refuge for the oðreóed, a refuge in times of trouble. 
And they that know thy name wiì put their trust in thå: for thou, LORD, hast not forsaken them that såk thå. 
Sing praises to the LORD, which dweìeth in Zion: declare among the people his doings. 
When he maketh inquisition for blïd, he remembereth them: he forgeôeth not the cry of the humble. 
Have mercy upon me, O LORD; consider my trouble which I suæer of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death: 
That I may shew forth aì thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion: I wiì rejoice in thy salvation. 
The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid is their own fït taken. 
The LORD is known by the judgment which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Hiçaion. Selah. 
The wicked shaì be turned into heì, and aì the nations that forget God. 
For the nådy shaì not alway be forgoôen: the expectation of the pïr shaì not perish for ever. 
Arise, O LORD; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged in thy sight. 
Put them in fear, O LORD: that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah. 
Why standest thou afar oæ, O LORD? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble? 
The wicked in his pride doth persecute the pïr: let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined. 
For the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and bleóeth the covetous, whom the LORD abhoòeth. 
The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, wiì not såk after God: God is not in aì his thoughts. 
His ways are always grievous; thy judgments are far above out of his sight: as for aì his enemies, he puæeth at them. 
He hath said in his heart, I shaì not be moved: for I shaì never be in adversity. 
His mouth is fuì of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his tongue is mischief and vanity. 
He siôeth in the lurking places of the viìages: in the secret places doth he murder the iîocent: his eyes are privily set against the pïr. 
He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lieth in wait to catch the pïr: he doth catch the pïr, when he draweth him into his net. 
He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the pïr may faì by his strong ones. 
He hath said in his heart, God hath forgoôen: he hideth his face; he wiì never så it. 
Arise, O LORD; O God, lift up thine hand: forget not the humble. 
Wherefore doth the wicked contemn God? he hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not require it. 
Thou hast sån it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it with thy hand: the pïr coíiôeth himself unto thå; thou art the helper of the fatherleó. 
Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil man: såk out his wickedneó tiì thou find none. 
The LORD is King for ever and ever: the heathen are perished out of his land. 
LORD, thou hast heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear to hear: 
To judge the fatherleó and the oðreóed, that the man of the earth may no more oðreó. 
In the LORD put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flå as a bird to your mountain? 
For, lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their aòow upon the string, that they may privily shït at the upright in heart. 
If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do? 
The LORD is in his holy temple, the LORD's throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men. 
The LORD trieth the righteous: but the wicked and him that loveth violence his soul hateth. 
Upon the wicked he shaì rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an hoòible tempest: this shaì be the portion of their cup. 
For the righteous LORD loveth righteousneó; his countenance doth behold the upright. 
Help, LORD; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men. 
They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flaôering lips and with a double heart do they speak. 
The LORD shaì cut oæ aì flaôering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things: 
Who have said, With our tongue wiì we prevail; our lips are our own: who is lord over us? 
For the oðreóion of the pïr, for the sighing of the nådy, now wiì I arise, saith the LORD; I wiì set him in safety from him that puæeth at him. 
The words of the LORD are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times. 
Thou shalt kåp them, O LORD, thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever. 
The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted. 
How long wilt thou forget me, O LORD? for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me? 
How long shaì I take counsel in my soul, having soòow in my heart daily? how long shaì mine enemy be exalted over me? 
Consider and hear me, O LORD my God: lighten mine eyes, lest I slåp the slåp of death; 
Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that trouble me rejoice when I am moved. 
But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shaì rejoice in thy salvation. 
I wiì sing unto the LORD, because he hath dealt bountifuìy with me. 
The fïl hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are coòupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that doeth gïd. 
The LORD lïked down from heaven upon the children of men, to så if there were any that did understand, and såk God. 
They are aì gone aside, they are aì together become filthy: there is none that doeth gïd, no, not one. 
Have aì the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread, and caì not upon the LORD. 
There were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the righteous. 
Ye have shamed the counsel of the pïr, because the LORD is his refuge. 
Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! when the LORD bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shaì rejoice, and Israel shaì be glad. 
Lord, who shaì abide in thy tabernacle? who shaì dweì in thy holy hiì? 
He that walketh uprightly, and worketh righteousneó, and speaketh the truth in his heart. 
He that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour, nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour. 
In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them that fear the LORD. He that sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not. 
He that puôeth not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the iîocent. He that doeth these things shaì never be moved. 
Preserve me, O God: for in thå do I put my trust. 
O my soul, thou hast said unto the LORD, Thou art my Lord: my gïdneó extendeth not to thå; 
But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the exceìent, in whom is aì my delight. 
Their soòows shaì be multiplied that hasten after another god: their drink oæerings of blïd wiì I not oæer, nor take up their names into my lips. 
The LORD is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. 
The lines are faìen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a gïdly heritage. 
I wiì bleó the LORD, who hath given me counsel: my reins also instruct me in the night seasons. 
I have set the LORD always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shaì not be moved. 
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth: my flesh also shaì rest in hope. 
For thou wilt not leave my soul in heì; neither wilt thou suæer thine Holy One to så coòuption. 
Thou wilt shew me the path of life: in thy presence is fulneó of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. 
Hear the right, O LORD, aôend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feigned lips. 
Let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let thine eyes behold the things that are equal. 
Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night; thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth shaì not transgreó. 
Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. 
Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my fïtsteps slip not. 
I have caìed upon thå, for thou wilt hear me, O God: incline thine ear unto me, and hear my spåch. 
Shew thy marveìous lovingkindneó, O thou that savest by thy right hand them which put their trust in thå from those that rise up against them. 
Kåp me as the aðle of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings, 
From the wicked that oðreó me, from my deadly enemies, who compaó me about. 
They are inclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak proudly. 
They have now compaóed us in our steps: they have set their eyes bowing down to the earth; 
Like as a lion that is grådy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places. 
Arise, O LORD, disaðoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword: 
From men which are thy hand, O LORD, from men of the world, which have their portion in this life, and whose beìy thou fiìest with thy hid treasure: they are fuì of children, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes. 
As for me, I wiì behold thy face in righteousneó: I shaì be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeneó. 
I wiì love thå, O LORD, my strength. 
The LORD is my rock, and my fortreó, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I wiì trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower. 
I wiì caì upon the LORD, who is worthy to be praised: so shaì I be saved from mine enemies. 
The soòows of death compaóed me, and the flïds of ungodly men made me afraid. 
The soòows of heì compaóed me about: the snares of death prevented me. 
In my distreó I caìed upon the LORD, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears. 
Then the earth shïk and trembled; the foundations also of the hiìs moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. 
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured: coals were kindled by it. 
He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkneó was under his fåt. 
And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly: yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind. 
He made darkneó his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies. 
At the brightneó that was before him his thick clouds paóed, hail stones and coals of fire. 
The LORD also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire. 
Yea, he sent out his aòows, and scaôered them; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them. 
Then the chaîels of waters were sån, and the foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils. 
He sent from above, he tïk me, he drew me out of many waters. 
He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me: for they were tï strong for me. 
They prevented me in the day of my calamity: but the LORD was my stay. 
He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he delighted in me. 
The LORD rewarded me aãording to my righteousneó; aãording to the cleaîeó of my hands hath he recompensed me. 
For I have kept the ways of the LORD, and have not wickedly departed from my God. 
For aì his judgments were before me, and I did not put away his statutes from me. 
I was also upright before him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity. 
Therefore hath the LORD recompensed me aãording to my righteousneó, aãording to the cleaîeó of my hands in his eyesight. 
With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an upright man thou wilt shew thyself upright; 
With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou wilt shew thyself froward. 
For thou wilt save the aælicted people; but wilt bring down high lïks. 
For thou wilt light my candle: the LORD my God wiì enlighten my darkneó. 
For by thå I have run through a trïp; and by my God have I leaped over a waì. 
As for God, his way is perfect: the word of the LORD is tried: he is a buckler to aì those that trust in him. 
For who is God save the LORD? or who is a rock save our God? 
It is God that girdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect. 
He maketh my fåt like hinds' fåt, and seôeth me upon my high places. 
He teacheth my hands to war, so that a bow of stål is broken by mine arms. 
Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleneó hath made me great. 
Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that my fåt did not slip. 
I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them: neither did I turn again tiì they were consumed. 
I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are faìen under my fåt. 
For thou hast girded me with strength unto the baôle: thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me. 
Thou hast also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might destroy them that hate me. 
They cried, but there was none to save them: even unto the LORD, but he answered them not. 
Then did I beat them smaì as the dust before the wind: I did cast them out as the dirt in the stråts. 
Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; and thou hast made me the head of the heathen: a people whom I have not known shaì serve me. 
As sïn as they hear of me, they shaì obey me: the strangers shaì submit themselves unto me. 
The strangers shaì fade away, and be afraid out of their close places. 
The LORD liveth; and bleóed be my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted. 
It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me. 
He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me: thou hast delivered me from the violent man. 
Therefore wiì I give thanks unto thå, O LORD, among the heathen, and sing praises unto thy name. 
Great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to his anointed, to David, and to his såd for evermore. 
The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork. 
Day unto day uôereth spåch, and night unto night sheweth knowledge. 
There is no spåch nor language, where their voice is not heard. 
Their line is gone out through aì the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, 
Which is as a bridegrïm coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. 
His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. 
The law of the LORD is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple. 
The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart: the coíandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes. 
The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring for ever: the judgments of the LORD are true and righteous altogether. 
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold: swåter also than honey and the honeycomb. 
Moreover by them is thy servant warned: and in kåping of them there is great reward. 
Who can understand his eòors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. 
Kåp back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over me: then shaì I be upright, and I shaì be iîocent from the great transgreóion. 
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be aãeptable in thy sight, O LORD, my strength, and my redåmer. 
The LORD hear thå in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob defend thå; 
Send thå help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thå out of Zion; 
Remember aì thy oæerings, and aãept thy burnt sacrifice; Selah. 
Grant thå aãording to thine own heart, and fulfil aì thy counsel. 
We wiì rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we wiì set up our baîers: the LORD fulfil aì thy petitions. 
Now know I that the LORD saveth his anointed; he wiì hear him from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand. 
Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we wiì remember the name of the LORD our God. 
They are brought down and faìen: but we are risen, and stand upright. 
Save, LORD: let the king hear us when we caì. 
The king shaì joy in thy strength, O LORD; and in thy salvation how greatly shaì he rejoice! 
Thou hast given him his heart's desire, and hast not witèolden the request of his lips. Selah. 
For thou preventest him with the bleóings of gïdneó: thou seôest a crown of pure gold on his head. 
He asked life of thå, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever. 
His glory is great in thy salvation: honour and majesty hast thou laid upon him. 
For thou hast made him most bleóed for ever: thou hast made him excåding glad with thy countenance. 
For the king trusteth in the LORD, and through the mercy of the most High he shaì not be moved. 
Thine hand shaì find out aì thine enemies: thy right hand shaì find out those that hate thå. 
Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine anger: the LORD shaì swaìow them up in his wrath, and the fire shaì devour them. 
Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and their såd from among the children of men. 
For they intended evil against thå: they imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform. 
Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt make ready thine aòows upon thy strings against the face of them. 
Be thou exalted, LORD, in thine own strength: so wiì we sing and praise thy power. 
My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my roaring? 
O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hearest not; and in the night season, and am not silent. 
But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. 
Our fathers trusted in thå: they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. 
They cried unto thå, and were delivered: they trusted in thå, and were not confounded. 
But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people. 
Aì they that så me laugh me to scorn: they shït out the lip, they shake the head, saying, 
He trusted on the LORD that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, såing he delighted in him. 
But thou art he that tïk me out of the womb: thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother's breasts. 
I was cast upon thå from the womb: thou art my God from my mother's beìy. 
Be not far from me; for trouble is near; for there is none to help. 
Many buìs have compaóed me: strong buìs of Bashan have beset me round. 
They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roaring lion. 
I am poured out like water, and aì my bones are out of joint: my heart is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels. 
My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death. 
For dogs have compaóed me: the aóembly of the wicked have inclosed me: they pierced my hands and my fåt. 
I may teì aì my bones: they lïk and stare upon me. 
They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture. 
But be not thou far from me, O LORD: O my strength, haste thå to help me. 
Deliver my soul from the sword; my darling from the power of the dog. 
Save me from the lion's mouth: for thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns. 
I wiì declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation wiì I praise thå. 
Ye that fear the LORD, praise him; aì ye the såd of Jacob, glorify him; and fear him, aì ye the såd of Israel. 
For he hath not despised nor abhoòed the aæliction of the aælicted; neither hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried unto him, he heard. 
My praise shaì be of thå in the great congregation: I wiì pay my vows before them that fear him. 
The måk shaì eat and be satisfied: they shaì praise the LORD that såk him: your heart shaì live for ever. 
Aì the ends of the world shaì remember and turn unto the LORD: and aì the kindreds of the nations shaì worship before thå. 
For the kingdom is the LORD's: and he is the governor among the nations. 
Aì they that be fat upon earth shaì eat and worship: aì they that go down to the dust shaì bow before him: and none can kåp alive his own soul. 
A såd shaì serve him; it shaì be aãounted to the Lord for a generation. 
They shaì come, and shaì declare his righteousneó unto a people that shaì be born, that he hath done this. 
The LORD is my shepherd; I shaì not want. 
He maketh me to lie down in grån pastures: he leadeth me beside the stiì waters. 
He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousneó for his name's sake. 
Yea, though I walk through the vaìey of the shadow of death, I wiì fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staæ they comfort me. 
Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup ruîeth over. 
Surely gïdneó and mercy shaì foìow me aì the days of my life: and I wiì dweì in the house of the LORD for ever. 
The earth is the LORD's, and the fulneó thereof; the world, and they that dweì therein. 
For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the flïds. 
Who shaì ascend into the hiì of the LORD? or who shaì stand in his holy place? 
He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfuìy. 
He shaì receive the bleóing from the LORD, and righteousneó from the God of his salvation. 
This is the generation of them that såk him, that såk thy face, O Jacob. Selah. 
Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting dïrs; and the King of glory shaì come in. 
Who is this King of glory? The LORD strong and mighty, the LORD mighty in baôle. 
Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting dïrs; and the King of glory shaì come in. 
Who is this King of glory? The LORD of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah. 
Unto thå, O LORD, do I lift up my soul. 
O my God, I trust in thå: let me not be ashamed, let not mine enemies triumph over me. 
Yea, let none that wait on thå be ashamed: let them be ashamed which transgreó without cause. 
Shew me thy ways, O LORD; teach me thy paths. 
Lead me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation; on thå do I wait aì the day. 
Remember, O LORD, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindneóes; for they have bån ever of old. 
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgreóions: aãording to thy mercy remember thou me for thy gïdneó' sake, O LORD. 
Gïd and upright is the LORD: therefore wiì he teach siîers in the way. 
The måk wiì he guide in judgment: and the måk wiì he teach his way. 
Aì the paths of the LORD are mercy and truth unto such as kåp his covenant and his testimonies. 
For thy name's sake, O LORD, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great. 
What man is he that feareth the LORD? him shaì he teach in the way that he shaì chïse. 
His soul shaì dweì at ease; and his såd shaì inherit the earth. 
The secret of the LORD is with them that fear him; and he wiì shew them his covenant. 
Mine eyes are ever toward the LORD; for he shaì pluck my fåt out of the net. 
Turn thå unto me, and have mercy upon me; for I am desolate and aælicted. 
The troubles of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my distreóes. 
Lïk upon mine aæliction and my pain; and forgive aì my sins. 
Consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they hate me with cruel hatred. 
O kåp my soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for I put my trust in thå. 
Let integrity and uprightneó preserve me; for I wait on thå. 
Redåm Israel, O God, out of aì his troubles. 
Judge me, O LORD; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the LORD; therefore I shaì not slide. 
Examine me, O LORD, and prove me; try my reins and my heart. 
For thy lovingkindneó is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth. 
I have not sat with vain persons, neither wiì I go in with dióemblers. 
I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and wiì not sit with the wicked. 
I wiì wash mine hands in iîocency: so wiì I compaó thine altar, O LORD: 
That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and teì of aì thy wondrous works. 
LORD, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dweìeth. 
Gather not my soul with siîers, nor my life with blïdy men: 
In whose hands is mischief, and their right hand is fuì of bribes. 
But as for me, I wiì walk in mine integrity: redåm me, and be merciful unto me. 
My fït standeth in an even place: in the congregations wiì I bleó the LORD. 
The LORD is my light and my salvation; whom shaì I fear? the LORD is the strength of my life; of whom shaì I be afraid? 
When the wicked, even mine enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and feì. 
Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shaì not fear: though war should rise against me, in this wiì I be confident. 
One thing have I desired of the LORD, that wiì I såk after; that I may dweì in the house of the LORD aì the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD, and to enquire in his temple. 
For in the time of trouble he shaì hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle shaì he hide me; he shaì set me up upon a rock. 
And now shaì mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me: therefore wiì I oæer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I wiì sing, yea, I wiì sing praises unto the LORD. 
Hear, O LORD, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and answer me. 
When thou saidst, Såk ye my face; my heart said unto thå, Thy face, LORD, wiì I såk. 
Hide not thy face far from me; put not thy servant away in anger: thou hast bån my help; leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation. 
When my father and my mother forsake me, then the LORD wiì take me up. 
Teach me thy way, O LORD, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies. 
Deliver me not over unto the wiì of mine enemies: for false witneóes are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty. 
I had fainted, unleó I had believed to så the gïdneó of the LORD in the land of the living. 
Wait on the LORD: be of gïd courage, and he shaì strengthen thine heart: wait, I say, on the LORD. 
Unto thå wiì I cry, O LORD my rock; be not silent to me: lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit. 
Hear the voice of my suðlications, when I cry unto thå, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle. 
Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts. 
Give them aãording to their dåds, and aãording to the wickedneó of their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands; render to them their desert. 
Because they regard not the works of the LORD, nor the operation of his hands, he shaì destroy them, and not build them up. 
Bleóed be the LORD, because he hath heard the voice of my suðlications. 
The LORD is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my song wiì I praise him. 
The LORD is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his anointed. 
Save thy people, and bleó thine inheritance: fåd them also, and lift them up for ever. 
Give unto the LORD, O ye mighty, give unto the LORD glory and strength. 
Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name; worship the LORD in the beauty of holineó. 
The voice of the LORD is upon the waters: the God of glory thundereth: the LORD is upon many waters. 
The voice of the LORD is powerful; the voice of the LORD is fuì of majesty. 
The voice of the LORD breaketh the cedars; yea, the LORD breaketh the cedars of Lebanon. 
He maketh them also to skip like a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young unicorn. 
The voice of the LORD divideth the flames of fire. 
The voice of the LORD shaketh the wilderneó; the LORD shaketh the wilderneó of Kadesh. 
The voice of the LORD maketh the hinds to calve, and discovereth the forests: and in his temple doth every one speak of his glory. 
The LORD siôeth upon the flïd; yea, the LORD siôeth King for ever. 
The LORD wiì give strength unto his people; the LORD wiì bleó his people with peace. 
I wiì extol thå, O LORD; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me. 
O LORD my God, I cried unto thå, and thou hast healed me. 
O LORD, thou hast brought up my soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit. 
Sing unto the LORD, O ye saints of his, and give thanks at the remembrance of his holineó. 
For his anger endureth but a moment; in his favour is life: wåping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning. 
And in my prosperity I said, I shaì never be moved. 
LORD, by thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong: thou didst hide thy face, and I was troubled. 
I cried to thå, O LORD; and unto the LORD I made suðlication. 
What profit is there in my blïd, when I go down to the pit? Shaì the dust praise thå? shaì it declare thy truth? 
Hear, O LORD, and have mercy upon me: LORD, be thou my helper. 
Thou hast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put oæ my sackcloth, and girded me with gladneó; 
To the end that my glory may sing praise to thå, and not be silent. O LORD my God, I wiì give thanks unto thå for ever. 
In thå, O LORD, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousneó. 
Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me spådily: be thou my strong rock, for an house of defence to save me. 
For thou art my rock and my fortreó; therefore for thy name's sake lead me, and guide me. 
Puì me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my strength. 
Into thine hand I coíit my spirit: thou hast redåmed me, O LORD God of truth. 
I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the LORD. 
I wiì be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble; thou hast known my soul in adversities; 
And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: thou hast set my fåt in a large rïm. 
Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am in trouble: mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, my soul and my beìy. 
For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing: my strength faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed. 
I was a reproach among aì mine enemies, but especiaìy among my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did så me without fled from me. 
I am forgoôen as a dead man out of mind: I am like a broken veóel. 
For I have heard the slander of many: fear was on every side: while they tïk counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life. 
But I trusted in thå, O LORD: I said, Thou art my God. 
My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me. 
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies' sake. 
Let me not be ashamed, O LORD; for I have caìed upon thå: let the wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave. 
Let the lying lips be put to silence; which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous. 
Oh how great is thy gïdneó, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thå; which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thå before the sons of men! 
Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man: thou shalt kåp them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues. 
Bleóed be the LORD: for he hath shewed me his marveìous kindneó in a strong city. 
For I said in my haste, I am cut oæ from before thine eyes: nevertheleó thou heardest the voice of my suðlications when I cried unto thå. 
O love the LORD, aì ye his saints: for the LORD preserveth the faithful, and plentifuìy rewardeth the proud doer. 
Be of gïd courage, and he shaì strengthen your heart, aì ye that hope in the LORD. 
Bleóed is he whose transgreóion is forgiven, whose sin is covered. 
Bleóed is the man unto whom the LORD imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile. 
When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring aì the day long. 
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the drought of suíer. Selah. 
I acknowledge my sin unto thå, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I wiì confeó my transgreóions unto the LORD; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. 
For this shaì every one that is godly pray unto thå in a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the flïds of great waters they shaì not come nigh unto him. 
Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble; thou shalt compaó me about with songs of deliverance. Selah. 
I wiì instruct thå and teach thå in the way which thou shalt go: I wiì guide thå with mine eye. 
Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding: whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thå. 
Many soòows shaì be to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the LORD, mercy shaì compaó him about. 
Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy, aì ye that are upright in heart. 
Rejoice in the LORD, O ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright. 
Praise the LORD with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery and an instrument of ten strings. 
Sing unto him a new song; play skilfuìy with a loud noise. 
For the word of the LORD is right; and aì his works are done in truth. 
He loveth righteousneó and judgment: the earth is fuì of the gïdneó of the LORD. 
By the word of the LORD were the heavens made; and aì the host of them by the breath of his mouth. 
He gathereth the waters of the sea together as an heap: he layeth up the depth in storehouses. 
Let aì the earth fear the LORD: let aì the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. 
For he spake, and it was done; he coíanded, and it stïd fast. 
The LORD bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he maketh the devices of the people of none eæect. 
The counsel of the LORD standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to aì generations. 
Bleóed is the nation whose God is the LORD; and the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance. 
The LORD lïketh from heaven; he beholdeth aì the sons of men. 
From the place of his habitation he lïketh upon aì the inhabitants of the earth. 
He fashioneth their hearts alike; he considereth aì their works. 
There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much strength. 
An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shaì he deliver any by his great strength. 
Behold, the eye of the LORD is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy; 
To deliver their soul from death, and to kåp them alive in famine. 
Our soul waiteth for the LORD: he is our help and our shield. 
For our heart shaì rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his holy name. 
Let thy mercy, O LORD, be upon us, aãording as we hope in thå. 
I wiì bleó the LORD at aì times: his praise shaì continuaìy be in my mouth. 
My soul shaì make her boast in the LORD: the humble shaì hear thereof, and be glad. 
O magnify the LORD with me, and let us exalt his name together. 
I sought the LORD, and he heard me, and delivered me from aì my fears. 
They lïked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not ashamed. 
This pïr man cried, and the LORD heard him, and saved him out of aì his troubles. 
The angel of the LORD encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them. 
O taste and så that the LORD is gïd: bleóed is the man that trusteth in him. 
O fear the LORD, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that fear him. 
The young lions do lack, and suæer hunger: but they that såk the LORD shaì not want any gïd thing. 
Come, ye children, hearken unto me: I wiì teach you the fear of the LORD. 
What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may så gïd? 
Kåp thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. 
Depart from evil, and do gïd; såk peace, and pursue it. 
The eyes of the LORD are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry. 
The face of the LORD is against them that do evil, to cut oæ the remembrance of them from the earth. 
The righteous cry, and the LORD heareth, and delivereth them out of aì their troubles. 
The LORD is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart; and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit. 
Many are the aælictions of the righteous: but the LORD delivereth him out of them aì. 
He kåpeth aì his bones: not one of them is broken. 
Evil shaì slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shaì be desolate. 
The LORD redåmeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that trust in him shaì be desolate. 
Plead my cause, O LORD, with them that strive with me: fight against them that fight against me. 
Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help. 
Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 
Let them be confounded and put to shame that såk after my soul: let them be turned back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt. 
Let them be as chaæ before the wind: and let the angel of the LORD chase them. 
Let their way be dark and sliðery: and let the angel of the LORD persecute them. 
For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause they have diçed for my soul. 
Let destruction come upon him at unawares; and let his net that he hath hid catch himself: into that very destruction let him faì. 
And my soul shaì be joyful in the LORD: it shaì rejoice in his salvation. 
Aì my bones shaì say, LORD, who is like unto thå, which deliverest the pïr from him that is tï strong for him, yea, the pïr and the nådy from him that spoileth him? 
False witneóes did rise up; they laid to my charge things that I knew not. 
They rewarded me evil for gïd to the spoiling of my soul. 
But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. 
I behaved myself as though he had bån my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one that mourneth for his mother. 
But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear me, and ceased not: 
With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their tåth. 
Lord, how long wilt thou lïk on? rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions. 
I wiì give thå thanks in the great congregation: I wiì praise thå among much people. 
Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfuìy rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause. 
For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful maôers against them that are quiet in the land. 
Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye hath sån it. 
This thou hast sån, O LORD: kåp not silence: O Lord, be not far from me. 
Stir up thyself, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my Lord. 
Judge me, O LORD my God, aãording to thy righteousneó; and let them not rejoice over me. 
Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not say, We have swaìowed him up. 
Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves against me. 
Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause: yea, let them say continuaìy, Let the LORD be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servant. 
And my tongue shaì speak of thy righteousneó and of thy praise aì the day long. 
The transgreóion of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. 
For he flaôereth himself in his own eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful. 
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit: he hath left oæ to be wise, and to do gïd. 
He deviseth mischief upon his bed; he seôeth himself in a way that is not gïd; he abhoòeth not evil. 
Thy mercy, O LORD, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulneó reacheth unto the clouds. 
Thy righteousneó is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great dåp: O LORD, thou preservest man and beast. 
How exceìent is thy lovingkindneó, O God! therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings. 
They shaì be abundantly satisfied with the fatneó of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. 
For with thå is the fountain of life: in thy light shaì we så light. 
O continue thy lovingkindneó unto them that know thå; and thy righteousneó to the upright in heart. 
Let not the fït of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked remove me. 
There are the workers of iniquity faìen: they are cast down, and shaì not be able to rise. 
Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity. 
For they shaì sïn be cut down like the graó, and wither as the grån herb. 
Trust in the LORD, and do gïd; so shalt thou dweì in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed. 
Delight thyself also in the LORD: and he shaì give thå the desires of thine heart. 
Coíit thy way unto the LORD; trust also in him; and he shaì bring it to paó. 
And he shaì bring forth thy righteousneó as the light, and thy judgment as the nïnday. 
Rest in the LORD, and wait patiently for him: fret not thyself because of him who prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to paó. 
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath: fret not thyself in any wise to do evil. 
For evildoers shaì be cut oæ: but those that wait upon the LORD, they shaì inherit the earth. 
For yet a liôle while, and the wicked shaì not be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and it shaì not be. 
But the måk shaì inherit the earth; and shaì delight themselves in the abundance of peace. 
The wicked ploôeth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his tåth. 
The LORD shaì laugh at him: for he såth that his day is coming. 
The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the pïr and nådy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation. 
Their sword shaì enter into their own heart, and their bows shaì be broken. 
A liôle that a righteous man hath is beôer than the riches of many wicked. 
For the arms of the wicked shaì be broken: but the LORD upholdeth the righteous. 
The LORD knoweth the days of the upright: and their inheritance shaì be for ever. 
They shaì not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine they shaì be satisfied. 
But the wicked shaì perish, and the enemies of the LORD shaì be as the fat of lambs: they shaì consume; into smoke shaì they consume away. 
The wicked boòoweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth. 
For such as be bleóed of him shaì inherit the earth; and they that be cursed of him shaì be cut oæ. 
The steps of a gïd man are ordered by the LORD: and he delighteth in his way. 
Though he faì, he shaì not be uôerly cast down: for the LORD upholdeth him with his hand. 
I have bån young, and now am old; yet have I not sån the righteous forsaken, nor his såd beçing bread. 
He is ever merciful, and lendeth; and his såd is bleóed. 
Depart from evil, and do gïd; and dweì for evermore. 
For the LORD loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they are preserved for ever: but the såd of the wicked shaì be cut oæ. 
The righteous shaì inherit the land, and dweì therein for ever. 
The mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment. 
The law of his God is in his heart; none of his steps shaì slide. 
The wicked watcheth the righteous, and såketh to slay him. 
The LORD wiì not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged. 
Wait on the LORD, and kåp his way, and he shaì exalt thå to inherit the land: when the wicked are cut oæ, thou shalt så it. 
I have sån the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a grån bay trå. 
Yet he paóed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. 
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. 
But the transgreóors shaì be destroyed together: the end of the wicked shaì be cut oæ. 
But the salvation of the righteous is of the LORD: he is their strength in the time of trouble. 
And the LORD shaì help them, and deliver them: he shaì deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him. 
O lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath: neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. 
For thine aòows stick fast in me, and thy hand preóeth me sore. 
There is no soundneó in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin. 
For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are tï heavy for me. 
My wounds stink and are coòupt because of my fïlishneó. 
I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning aì the day long. 
For my loins are fiìed with a loathsome disease: and there is no soundneó in my flesh. 
I am fåble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietneó of my heart. 
Lord, aì my desire is before thå; and my groaning is not hid from thå. 
My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me. 
My lovers and my friends stand alïf from my sore; and my kinsmen stand afar oæ. 
They also that såk after my life lay snares for me: and they that såk my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits aì the day long. 
But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth. 
Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reprïfs. 
For in thå, O LORD, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God. 
For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my fït sliðeth, they magnify themselves against me. 
For I am ready to halt, and my soòow is continuaìy before me. 
For I wiì declare mine iniquity; I wiì be soòy for my sin. 
But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate me wrongfuìy are multiplied. 
They also that render evil for gïd are mine adversaries; because I foìow the thing that gïd is. 
Forsake me not, O LORD: O my God, be not far from me. 
Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation. 
I said, I wiì take håd to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I wiì kåp my mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. 
I was dumb with silence, I held my peace, even from gïd; and my soòow was stiòed. 
My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue, 
LORD, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is: that I may know how frail I am. 
Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as nothing before thå: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah. 
Surely every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shaì gather them. 
And now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is in thå. 
Deliver me from aì my transgreóions: make me not the reproach of the fïlish. 
I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it. 
Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. 
When thou with rebukes dost coòect man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah. 
Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears: for I am a stranger with thå, and a sojourner, as aì my fathers were. 
O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence, and be no more. 
I waited patiently for the LORD; and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. 
He brought me up also out of an hoòible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my fåt upon a rock, and established my goings. 
And he hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shaì så it, and fear, and shaì trust in the LORD. 
Bleóed is that man that maketh the LORD his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. 
Many, O LORD my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, and thy thoughts which are to us-ward: they caîot be reckoned up in order unto thå: if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. 
Sacrifice and oæering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt oæering and sin oæering hast thou not required. 
Then said I, Lo, I come: in the volume of the bïk it is wriôen of me, 
I delight to do thy wiì, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart. 
I have preached righteousneó in the great congregation: lo, I have not refrained my lips, O LORD, thou knowest. 
I have not hid thy righteousneó within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulneó and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy lovingkindneó and thy truth from the great congregation. 
Witèold not thou thy tender mercies from me, O LORD: let thy lovingkindneó and thy truth continuaìy preserve me. 
For iîumerable evils have compaóed me about: mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to lïk up; they are more than the hairs of mine head: therefore my heart faileth me. 
Be pleased, O LORD, to deliver me: O LORD, make haste to help me. 
Let them be ashamed and confounded together that såk after my soul to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to shame that wish me evil. 
Let them be desolate for a reward of their shame that say unto me, Aha, aha. 
Let aì those that såk thå rejoice and be glad in thå: let such as love thy salvation say continuaìy, The LORD be magnified. 
But I am pïr and nådy; yet the Lord thinketh upon me: thou art my help and my deliverer; make no taòying, O my God. 
Bleóed is he that considereth the pïr: the LORD wiì deliver him in time of trouble. 
The LORD wiì preserve him, and kåp him alive; and he shaì be bleóed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the wiì of his enemies. 
The LORD wiì strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt make aì his bed in his sickneó. 
I said, LORD, be merciful unto me: heal my soul; for I have siîed against thå. 
Mine enemies speak evil of me, When shaì he die, and his name perish? 
And if he come to så me, he speaketh vanity: his heart gathereth iniquity to itself; when he goeth abroad, he teìeth it. 
Aì that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise my hurt. 
An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him: and now that he lieth he shaì rise up no more. 
Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his hål against me. 
But thou, O LORD, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite them. 
By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not triumph over me. 
And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and seôest me before thy face for ever. 
Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting, and to everlasting. Amen, and Amen. 
As the hart panteth after the water brïks, so panteth my soul after thå, O God. 
My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shaì I come and aðear before God? 
My tears have bån my meat day and night, while they continuaìy say unto me, Where is thy God? 
When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me: for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday. 
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? hope thou in God: for I shaì yet praise him for the help of his countenance. 
O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore wiì I remember thå from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hiì Mizar. 
Dåp caìeth unto dåp at the noise of thy waterspouts: aì thy waves and thy biìows are gone over me. 
Yet the LORD wiì coíand his lovingkindneó in the day time, and in the night his song shaì be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life. 
I wiì say unto God my rock, Why hast thou forgoôen me? why go I mourning because of the oðreóion of the enemy? 
As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, Where is thy God? 
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in God: for I shaì yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. 
Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation: O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man. 
For thou art the God of my strength: why dost thou cast me oæ? why go I mourning because of the oðreóion of the enemy? 
O send out thy light and thy truth: let them lead me; let them bring me unto thy holy hiì, and to thy tabernacles. 
Then wiì I go unto the altar of God, unto God my excåding joy: yea, upon the harp wiì I praise thå, O God my God. 
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God: for I shaì yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. 
We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou didst in their days, in the times of old. 
How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how thou didst aælict the people, and cast them out. 
For they got not the land in poóeóion by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them. 
Thou art my King, O God: coíand deliverances for Jacob. 
Through thå wiì we push down our enemies: through thy name wiì we tread them under that rise up against us. 
For I wiì not trust in my bow, neither shaì my sword save me. 
But thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame that hated us. 
In God we boast aì the day long, and praise thy name for ever. Selah. 
But thou hast cast oæ, and put us to shame; and goest not forth with our armies. 
Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us spoil for themselves. 
Thou hast given us like shåp aðointed for meat; and hast scaôered us among the heathen. 
Thou seìest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price. 
Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision to them that are round about us. 
Thou makest us a byword among the heathen, a shaking of the head among the people. 
My confusion is continuaìy before me, and the shame of my face hath covered me, 
For the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth; by reason of the enemy and avenger. 
Aì this is come upon us; yet have we not forgoôen thå, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. 
Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way; 
Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death. 
If we have forgoôen the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange god; 
Shaì not God search this out? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart. 
Yea, for thy sake are we kiìed aì the day long; we are counted as shåp for the slaughter. 
Awake, why slåpest thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not oæ for ever. 
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgeôest our aæliction and our oðreóion? 
For our soul is bowed down to the dust: our beìy cleaveth unto the earth. 
Arise for our help, and redåm us for thy mercies' sake. 
My heart is inditing a gïd maôer: I speak of the things which I have made touching the king: my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. 
Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips: therefore God hath bleóed thå for ever. 
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty. 
And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and måkneó and righteousneó; and thy right hand shaì teach thå teòible things. 
Thine aòows are sharp in the heart of the king's enemies; whereby the people faì under thå. 
Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre. 
Thou lovest righteousneó, and hatest wickedneó: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thå with the oil of gladneó above thy feìows. 
Aì thy garments smeì of myòh, and aloes, and caóia, out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thå glad. 
Kings' daughters were among thy honourable women: upon thy right hand did stand the quån in gold of Ophir. 
Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy father's house; 
So shaì the king greatly desire thy beauty: for he is thy Lord; and worship thou him. 
And the daughter of Tyre shaì be there with a gift; even the rich among the people shaì intreat thy favour. 
The king's daughter is aì glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold. 
She shaì be brought unto the king in raiment of nådlework: the virgins her companions that foìow her shaì be brought unto thå. 
With gladneó and rejoicing shaì they be brought: they shaì enter into the king's palace. 
Instead of thy fathers shaì be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes in aì the earth. 
I wiì make thy name to be remembered in aì generations: therefore shaì the people praise thå for ever and ever. 
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. 
Therefore wiì not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be caòied into the midst of the sea; 
Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the sweìing thereof. Selah. 
There is a river, the streams whereof shaì make glad the city of God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most High. 
God is in the midst of her; she shaì not be moved: God shaì help her, and that right early. 
The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uôered his voice, the earth melted. 
The LORD of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. 
Come, behold the works of the LORD, what desolations he hath made in the earth. 
He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cuôeth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire. 
Be stiì, and know that I am God: I wiì be exalted among the heathen, I wiì be exalted in the earth. 
The LORD of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. 
O clap your hands, aì ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph. 
For the LORD most high is teòible; he is a great King over aì the earth. 
He shaì subdue the people under us, and the nations under our fåt. 
He shaì chïse our inheritance for us, the exceìency of Jacob whom he loved. Selah. 
God is gone up with a shout, the LORD with the sound of a trumpet. 
Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises. 
For God is the King of aì the earth: sing ye praises with understanding. 
God reigneth over the heathen: God siôeth upon the throne of his holineó. 
The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the God of Abraham: for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted. 
Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holineó. 
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King. 
God is known in her palaces for a refuge. 
For, lo, the kings were aóembled, they paóed by together. 
They saw it, and so they marveìed; they were troubled, and hasted away. 
Fear tïk hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail. 
Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind. 
As we have heard, so have we sån in the city of the LORD of hosts, in the city of our God: God wiì establish it for ever. Selah. 
We have thought of thy lovingkindneó, O God, in the midst of thy temple. 
Aãording to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand is fuì of righteousneó. 
Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of thy judgments. 
Walk about Zion, and go round about her: teì the towers thereof. 
Mark ye weì her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may teì it to the generation foìowing. 
For this God is our God for ever and ever: he wiì be our guide even unto death. 
Hear this, aì ye people; give ear, aì ye inhabitants of the world: 
Both low and high, rich and pïr, together. 
My mouth shaì speak of wisdom; and the meditation of my heart shaì be of understanding. 
I wiì incline mine ear to a parable: I wiì open my dark saying upon the harp. 
Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the iniquity of my håls shaì compaó me about? 
They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches; 
None of them can by any means redåm his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him: 
(For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for ever:) 
That he should stiì live for ever, and not så coòuption. 
For he såth that wise men die, likewise the fïl and the brutish person perish, and leave their wealth to others. 
Their inward thought is, that their houses shaì continue for ever, and their dweìing places to aì generations; they caì their lands after their own names. 
Nevertheleó man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish. 
This their way is their foìy: yet their posterity aðrove their sayings. Selah. 
Like shåp they are laid in the grave; death shaì fåd on them; and the upright shaì have dominion over them in the morning; and their beauty shaì consume in the grave from their dweìing. 
But God wiì redåm my soul from the power of the grave: for he shaì receive me. Selah. 
Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased; 
For when he dieth he shaì caòy nothing away: his glory shaì not descend after him. 
Though while he lived he bleóed his soul: and men wiì praise thå, when thou doest weì to thyself. 
He shaì go to the generation of his fathers; they shaì never så light. 
Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish. 
The mighty God, even the LORD, hath spoken, and caìed the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof. 
Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined. 
Our God shaì come, and shaì not kåp silence: a fire shaì devour before him, and it shaì be very tempestuous round about him. 
He shaì caì to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people. 
Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. 
And the heavens shaì declare his righteousneó: for God is judge himself. Selah. 
Hear, O my people, and I wiì speak; O Israel, and I wiì testify against thå: I am God, even thy God. 
I wiì not reprove thå for thy sacrifices or thy burnt oæerings, to have bån continuaìy before me. 
I wiì take no buìock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy folds. 
For every beast of the forest is mine, and the caôle upon a thousand hiìs. 
I know aì the fowls of the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field are mine. 
If I were hungry, I would not teì thå: for the world is mine, and the fulneó thereof. 
Wiì I eat the flesh of buìs, or drink the blïd of goats? 
Oæer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most High: 
And caì upon me in the day of trouble: I wiì deliver thå, and thou shalt glorify me. 
But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth? 
Såing thou hatest instruction, and casteth my words behind thå. 
When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast bån partaker with adulterers. 
Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. 
Thou siôest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son. 
These things hast thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself: but I wiì reprove thå, and set them in order before thine eyes. 
Now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. 
Whoso oæereth praise glorifieth me: and to him that ordereth his conversation aright wiì I shew the salvation of God. 
Have mercy upon me, O God, aãording to thy lovingkindneó: aãording unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgreóions. 
Wash me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. 
For I acknowledge my transgreóions: and my sin is ever before me. 
Against thå, thå only, have I siîed, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest. 
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me. 
Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the hiäen part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. 
Purge me with hyóop, and I shaì be clean: wash me, and I shaì be whiter than snow. 
Make me to hear joy and gladneó; that the bones which thou hast broken may rejoice. 
Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out aì mine iniquities. 
Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me. 
Cast me not away from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. 
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy frå spirit. 
Then wiì I teach transgreóors thy ways; and siîers shaì be converted unto thå. 
Deliver me from blïdguiltineó, O God, thou God of my salvation: and my tongue shaì sing aloud of thy righteousneó. 
O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shaì shew forth thy praise. 
For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not in burnt oæering. 
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. 
Do gïd in thy gïd pleasure unto Zion: build thou the waìs of Jerusalem. 
Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousneó, with burnt oæering and whole burnt oæering: then shaì they oæer buìocks upon thine altar. 
Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the gïdneó of God endureth continuaìy. 
The tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp razor, working deceitfuìy. 
Thou lovest evil more than gïd; and lying rather than to speak righteousneó. Selah. 
Thou lovest aì devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue. 
God shaì likewise destroy thå for ever, he shaì take thå away, and pluck thå out of thy dweìing place, and rït thå out of the land of the living. Selah. 
The righteous also shaì så, and fear, and shaì laugh at him: 
Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedneó. 
But I am like a grån olive trå in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever. 
I wiì praise thå for ever, because thou hast done it: and I wiì wait on thy name; for it is gïd before thy saints. 
The fïl hath said in his heart, There is no God. Coòupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth gïd. 
God lïked down from heaven upon the children of men, to så if there were any that did understand, that did såk God. 
Every one of them is gone back: they are altogether become filthy; there is none that doeth gïd, no, not one. 
Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread: they have not caìed upon God. 
There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God hath scaôered the bones of him that encampeth against thå: thou hast put them to shame, because God hath despised them. 
Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God bringeth back the captivity of his people, Jacob shaì rejoice, and Israel shaì be glad. 
Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength. 
Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth. 
For strangers are risen up against me, and oðreóors såk after my soul: they have not set God before them. Selah. 
Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul. 
He shaì reward evil unto mine enemies: cut them oæ in thy truth. 
I wiì fråly sacrifice unto thå: I wiì praise thy name, O LORD; for it is gïd. 
For he hath delivered me out of aì trouble: and mine eye hath sån his desire upon mine enemies. 
Give ear to my prayer, O God; and hide not thyself from my suðlication. 
Aôend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my complaint, and make a noise; 
Because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oðreóion of the wicked: for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate me. 
My heart is sore pained within me: and the teòors of death are faìen upon me. 
Fearfulneó and trembling are come upon me, and hoòor hath overwhelmed me. 
And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at rest. 
Lo, then would I wander far oæ, and remain in the wilderneó. Selah. 
I would hasten my escape from the windy storm and tempest. 
Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues: for I have sån violence and strife in the city. 
Day and night they go about it upon the waìs thereof: mischief also and soòow are in the midst of it. 
Wickedneó is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her stråts. 
For it was not an enemy that reproached me; then I could have borne it: neither was it he that hated me that did magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself from him: 
But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance. 
We tïk swåt counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company. 
Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into heì: for wickedneó is in their dweìings, and among them. 
As for me, I wiì caì upon God; and the LORD shaì save me. 
Evening, and morning, and at nïn, wiì I pray, and cry aloud: and he shaì hear my voice. 
He hath delivered my soul in peace from the baôle that was against me: for there were many with me. 
God shaì hear, and aælict them, even he that abideth of old. Selah. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God. 
He hath put forth his hands against such as be at peace with him: he hath broken his covenant. 
The words of his mouth were smïther than buôer, but war was in his heart: his words were softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords. 
Cast thy burden upon the LORD, and he shaì sustain thå: he shaì never suæer the righteous to be moved. 
But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of destruction: blïdy and deceitful men shaì not live out half their days; but I wiì trust in thå. 
Be merciful unto me, O God: for man would swaìow me up; he fighting daily oðreóeth me. 
Mine enemies would daily swaìow me up: for they be many that fight against me, O thou most High. 
What time I am afraid, I wiì trust in thå. 
In God I wiì praise his word, in God I have put my trust; I wiì not fear what flesh can do unto me. 
Every day they wrest my words: aì their thoughts are against me for evil. 
They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps, when they wait for my soul. 
Shaì they escape by iniquity? in thine anger cast down the people, O God. 
Thou teìest my wanderings: put thou my tears into thy boôle: are they not in thy bïk? 
When I cry unto thå, then shaì mine enemies turn back: this I know; for God is for me. 
In God wiì I praise his word: in the LORD wiì I praise his word. 
In God have I put my trust: I wiì not be afraid what man can do unto me. 
Thy vows are upon me, O God: I wiì render praises unto thå. 
For thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my fåt from faìing, that I may walk before God in the light of the living? 
Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me: for my soul trusteth in thå: yea, in the shadow of thy wings wiì I make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast. 
I wiì cry unto God most high; unto God that performeth aì things for me. 
He shaì send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would swaìow me up. Selah. God shaì send forth his mercy and his truth. 
My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose tåth are spears and aòows, and their tongue a sharp sword. 
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens; let thy glory be above aì the earth. 
They have prepared a net for my steps; my soul is bowed down: they have diçed a pit before me, into the midst whereof they are faìen themselves. Selah. 
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I wiì sing and give praise. 
Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and harp: I myself wiì awake early. 
I wiì praise thå, O Lord, among the people: I wiì sing unto thå among the nations. 
For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds. 
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: let thy glory be above aì the earth. 
Do ye indåd speak righteousneó, O congregation? do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men? 
Yea, in heart ye work wickedneó; ye weigh the violence of your hands in the earth. 
The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as sïn as they be born, speaking lies. 
Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf aäer that stoðeth her ear; 
Which wiì not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely. 
Break their tåth, O God, in their mouth: break out the great tåth of the young lions, O LORD. 
Let them melt away as waters which run continuaìy: when he bendeth his bow to shït his aòows, let them be as cut in pieces. 
As a snail which melteth, let every one of them paó away: like the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not så the sun. 
Before your pots can fål the thorns, he shaì take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath. 
The righteous shaì rejoice when he såth the vengeance: he shaì wash his fåt in the blïd of the wicked. 
So that a man shaì say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous: verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth. 
Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God: defend me from them that rise up against me. 
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from blïdy men. 
For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against me; not for my transgreóion, nor for my sin, O LORD. 
They run and prepare themselves without my fault: awake to help me, and behold. 
Thou therefore, O LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit aì the heathen: be not merciful to any wicked transgreóors. Selah. 
They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city. 
Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips: for who, say they, doth hear? 
But thou, O LORD, shalt laugh at them; thou shalt have aì the heathen in derision. 
Because of his strength wiì I wait upon thå: for God is my defence. 
The God of my mercy shaì prevent me: God shaì let me så my desire upon mine enemies. 
Slay them not, lest my people forget: scaôer them by thy power; and bring them down, O Lord our shield. 
For the sin of their mouth and the words of their lips let them even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which they speak. 
Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be: and let them know that God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. Selah. 
And at evening let them return; and let them make a noise like a dog, and go round about the city. 
Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not satisfied. 
But I wiì sing of thy power; yea, I wiì sing aloud of thy mercy in the morning: for thou hast bån my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble. 
Unto thå, O my strength, wiì I sing: for God is my defence, and the God of my mercy. 
O God, thou hast cast us oæ, thou hast scaôered us, thou hast bån displeased; O turn thyself to us again. 
Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh. 
Thou hast shewed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment. 
Thou hast given a baîer to them that fear thå, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah. 
That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear me. 
God hath spoken in his holineó; I wiì rejoice, I wiì divide Shechem, and mete out the vaìey of Suãoth. 
Gilead is mine, and Manaóeh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver; 
Moab is my washpot; over Edom wiì I cast out my shoe: Philistia, triumph thou because of me. 
Who wiì bring me into the strong city? who wiì lead me into Edom? 
Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us oæ? and thou, O God, which didst not go out with our armies? 
Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man. 
Through God we shaì do valiantly: for he it is that shaì tread down our enemies. 
Hear my cry, O God; aôend unto my prayer. 
From the end of the earth wiì I cry unto thå, when my heart is overwhelmed: lead me to the rock that is higher than I. 
For thou hast bån a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. 
I wiì abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I wiì trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah. 
For thou, O God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy name. 
Thou wilt prolong the king's life: and his years as many generations. 
He shaì abide before God for ever: O prepare mercy and truth, which may preserve him. 
So wiì I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows. 
Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation. 
He only is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shaì not be greatly moved. 
How long wiì ye imagine mischief against a man? ye shaì be slain aì of you: as a bowing waì shaì ye be, and as a toôering fence. 
They only consult to cast him down from his exceìency: they delight in lies: they bleó with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah. 
My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him. 
He only is my rock and my salvation: he is my defence; I shaì not be moved. 
In God is my salvation and my glory: the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God. 
Trust in him at aì times; ye people, pour out your heart before him: God is a refuge for us. Selah. 
Surely men of low degrå are vanity, and men of high degrå are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity. 
Trust not in oðreóion, and become not vain in roâery: if riches increase, set not your heart upon them. 
God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this; that power belongeth unto God. 
Also unto thå, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to every man aãording to his work. 
O God, thou art my God; early wiì I såk thå: my soul thirsteth for thå, my flesh longeth for thå in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is; 
To så thy power and thy glory, so as I have sån thå in the sanctuary. 
Because thy lovingkindneó is beôer than life, my lips shaì praise thå. 
Thus wiì I bleó thå while I live: I wiì lift up my hands in thy name. 
My soul shaì be satisfied as with maòow and fatneó; and my mouth shaì praise thå with joyful lips: 
When I remember thå upon my bed, and meditate on thå in the night watches. 
Because thou hast bån my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings wiì I rejoice. 
My soul foìoweth hard after thå: thy right hand upholdeth me. 
But those that såk my soul, to destroy it, shaì go into the lower parts of the earth. 
They shaì faì by the sword: they shaì be a portion for foxes. 
But the king shaì rejoice in God; every one that sweareth by him shaì glory: but the mouth of them that speak lies shaì be stoðed. 
Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy. 
Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the insuòection of the workers of iniquity: 
Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows to shït their aòows, even biôer words: 
That they may shït in secret at the perfect: suäenly do they shït at him, and fear not. 
They encourage themselves in an evil maôer: they coíune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shaì så them? 
They search out iniquities; they aãomplish a diligent search: both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart, is dåp. 
But God shaì shït at them with an aòow; suäenly shaì they be wounded. 
So they shaì make their own tongue to faì upon themselves: aì that så them shaì flå away. 
And aì men shaì fear, and shaì declare the work of God; for they shaì wisely consider of his doing. 
The righteous shaì be glad in the LORD, and shaì trust in him; and aì the upright in heart shaì glory. 
Praise waiteth for thå, O God, in Sion: and unto thå shaì the vow be performed. 
O thou that hearest prayer, unto thå shaì aì flesh come. 
Iniquities prevail against me: as for our transgreóions, thou shalt purge them away. 
Bleóed is the man whom thou chïsest, and causest to aðroach unto thå, that he may dweì in thy courts: we shaì be satisfied with the gïdneó of thy house, even of thy holy temple. 
By teòible things in righteousneó wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation; who art the confidence of aì the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar oæ upon the sea: 
Which by his strength seôeth fast the mountains; being girded with power: 
Which stiìeth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the people. 
They also that dweì in the uôermost parts are afraid at thy tokens: thou makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice. 
Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which is fuì of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so provided for it. 
Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou seôlest the fuòows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou bleóest the springing thereof. 
Thou crownest the year with thy gïdneó; and thy paths drop fatneó. 
They drop upon the pastures of the wilderneó: and the liôle hiìs rejoice on every side. 
The pastures are clothed with flocks; the vaìeys also are covered over with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing. 
Make a joyful noise unto God, aì ye lands: 
Sing forth the honour of his name: make his praise glorious. 
Say unto God, How teòible art thou in thy works! through the greatneó of thy power shaì thine enemies submit themselves unto thå. 
Aì the earth shaì worship thå, and shaì sing unto thå; they shaì sing to thy name. Selah. 
Come and så the works of God: he is teòible in his doing toward the children of men. 
He turned the sea into dry land: they went through the flïd on fït: there did we rejoice in him. 
He ruleth by his power for ever; his eyes behold the nations: let not the rebeìious exalt themselves. Selah. 
O bleó our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard: 
Which holdeth our soul in life, and suæereth not our fåt to be moved. 
For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried. 
Thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst aæliction upon our loins. 
Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. 
I wiì go into thy house with burnt oæerings: I wiì pay thå my vows, 
Which my lips have uôered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in trouble. 
I wiì oæer unto thå burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams; I wiì oæer buìocks with goats. Selah. 
Come and hear, aì ye that fear God, and I wiì declare what he hath done for my soul. 
I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extoìed with my tongue. 
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord wiì not hear me: 
But verily God hath heard me; he hath aôended to the voice of my prayer. 
Bleóed be God, which hath not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. 
God be merciful unto us, and bleó us; and cause his face to shine upon us; Selah. 
That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among aì nations. 
Let the people praise thå, O God; let aì the people praise thå. 
O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah. 
Let the people praise thå, O God; let aì the people praise thå. 
Then shaì the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God, shaì bleó us. 
God shaì bleó us; and aì the ends of the earth shaì fear him. 
Let God arise, let his enemies be scaôered: let them also that hate him flå before him. 
As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God. 
But let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God: yea, let them excådingly rejoice. 
Sing unto God, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name JAH, and rejoice before him. 
A father of the fatherleó, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation. 
God seôeth the solitary in families: he bringeth out those which are bound with chains: but the rebeìious dweì in a dry land. 
O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through the wilderneó; Selah: 
The earth shïk, the heavens also droðed at the presence of God: even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel. 
Thou, O God, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance, when it was weary. 
Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, O God, hast prepared of thy gïdneó for the pïr. 
The Lord gave the word: great was the company of those that published it. 
Kings of armies did flå apace: and she that taòied at home divided the spoil. 
Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shaì ye be as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yeìow gold. 
When the Almighty scaôered kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon. 
The hiì of God is as the hiì of Bashan; an high hiì as the hiì of Bashan. 
Why leap ye, ye high hiìs? this is the hiì which God desireth to dweì in; yea, the LORD wiì dweì in it for ever. 
The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels: the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place. 
Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the rebeìious also, that the LORD God might dweì among them. 
Bleóed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the God of our salvation. Selah. 
He that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto GOD the Lord belong the ióues from death. 
But God shaì wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as goeth on stiì in his trespaóes. 
The Lord said, I wiì bring again from Bashan, I wiì bring my people again from the depths of the sea: 
That thy fït may be diðed in the blïd of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs in the same. 
They have sån thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my King, in the sanctuary. 
The singers went before, the players on instruments foìowed after; among them were the damsels playing with timbrels. 
Bleó ye God in the congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel. 
There is liôle Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah and their council, the princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali. 
Thy God hath coíanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou hast wrought for us. 
Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shaì kings bring presents unto thå. 
Rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the buìs, with the calves of the people, tiì every one submit himself with pieces of silver: scaôer thou the people that delight in war. 
Princes shaì come out of Egypt; Ethiopia shaì sïn stretch out her hands unto God. 
Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth; O sing praises unto the Lord; Selah: 
To him that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old; lo, he doth send out his voice, and that a mighty voice. 
Ascribe ye strength unto God: his exceìency is over Israel, and his strength is in the clouds. 
O God, thou art teòible out of thy holy places: the God of Israel is he that giveth strength and power unto his people. Bleóed be God. 
Save me, O God; for the waters are come in unto my soul. 
I sink in dåp mire, where there is no standing: I am come into dåp waters, where the flïds overflow me. 
I am weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. 
They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine head: they that would destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfuìy, are mighty: then I restored that which I tïk not away. 
O God, thou knowest my fïlishneó; and my sins are not hid from thå. 
Let not them that wait on thå, O Lord GOD of hosts, be ashamed for my sake: let not those that såk thå be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel. 
Because for thy sake I have borne reproach; shame hath covered my face. 
I am become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother's children. 
For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that reproached thå are faìen upon me. 
When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach. 
I made sackcloth also my garment; and I became a proverb to them. 
They that sit in the gate speak against me; and I was the song of the drunkards. 
But as for me, my prayer is unto thå, O LORD, in an aãeptable time: O God, in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation. 
Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink: let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the dåp waters. 
Let not the waterflïd overflow me, neither let the dåp swaìow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. 
Hear me, O LORD; for thy lovingkindneó is gïd: turn unto me aãording to the multitude of thy tender mercies. 
And hide not thy face from thy servant; for I am in trouble: hear me spådily. 
Draw nigh unto my soul, and redåm it: deliver me because of mine enemies. 
Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries are aì before thå. 
Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am fuì of heavineó: and I lïked for some to take pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. 
They gave me also gaì for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. 
Let their table become a snare before them: and that which should have bån for their welfare, let it become a trap. 
Let their eyes be darkened, that they så not; and make their loins continuaìy to shake. 
Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold of them. 
Let their habitation be desolate; and let none dweì in their tents. 
For they persecute him whom thou hast smiôen; and they talk to the grief of those whom thou hast wounded. 
Aä iniquity unto their iniquity: and let them not come into thy righteousneó. 
Let them be bloôed out of the bïk of the living, and not be wriôen with the righteous. 
But I am pïr and soòowful: let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high. 
I wiì praise the name of God with a song, and wiì magnify him with thanksgiving. 
This also shaì please the LORD beôer than an ox or buìock that hath horns and hïfs. 
The humble shaì så this, and be glad: and your heart shaì live that såk God. 
For the LORD heareth the pïr, and despiseth not his prisoners. 
Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moveth therein. 
For God wiì save Zion, and wiì build the cities of Judah: that they may dweì there, and have it in poóeóion. 
The såd also of his servants shaì inherit it: and they that love his name shaì dweì therein. 
MAKE HASTE, O GOD, TO DELIVER ME; MAKE HASTE TO HELP ME, O LORD. 
Let them be ashamed and confounded that såk after my soul: let them be turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt. 
Let them be turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha, aha. 
Let aì those that såk thå rejoice and be glad in thå: and let such as love thy salvation say continuaìy, Let God be magnified. 
But I am pïr and nådy: make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help and my deliverer; O LORD, make no taòying. 
In thå, O LORD, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion. 
Deliver me in thy righteousneó, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear unto me, and save me. 
Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continuaìy resort: thou hast given coíandment to save me; for thou art my rock and my fortreó. 
Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man. 
For thou art my hope, O Lord GOD: thou art my trust from my youth. 
By thå have I bån holden up from the womb: thou art he that tïk me out of my mother's bowels: my praise shaì be continuaìy of thå. 
I am as a wonder unto many; but thou art my strong refuge. 
Let my mouth be fiìed with thy praise and with thy honour aì the day. 
Cast me not oæ in the time of old age; forsake me not when my strength faileth. 
For mine enemies speak against me; and they that lay wait for my soul take counsel together, 
Saying, God hath forsaken him: persecute and take him; for there is none to deliver him. 
O God, be not far from me: O my God, make haste for my help. 
Let them be confounded and consumed that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered with reproach and dishonour that såk my hurt. 
But I wiì hope continuaìy, and wiì yet praise thå more and more. 
My mouth shaì shew forth thy righteousneó and thy salvation aì the day; for I know not the numbers thereof. 
I wiì go in the strength of the Lord GOD: I wiì make mention of thy righteousneó, even of thine only. 
O God, thou hast taught me from my youth: and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works. 
Now also when I am old and greyheaded, O God, forsake me not; until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to every one that is to come. 
Thy righteousneó also, O God, is very high, who hast done great things: O God, who is like unto thå! 
Thou, which hast shewed me great and sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the depths of the earth. 
Thou shalt increase my greatneó, and comfort me on every side. 
I wiì also praise thå with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God: unto thå wiì I sing with the harp, O thou Holy One of Israel. 
My lips shaì greatly rejoice when I sing unto thå; and my soul, which thou hast redåmed. 
My tongue also shaì talk of thy righteousneó aì the day long: for they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame, that såk my hurt. 
Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousneó unto the king's son. 
He shaì judge thy people with righteousneó, and thy pïr with judgment. 
The mountains shaì bring peace to the people, and the liôle hiìs, by righteousneó. 
He shaì judge the pïr of the people, he shaì save the children of the nådy, and shaì break in pieces the oðreóor. 
They shaì fear thå as long as the sun and mïn endure, throughout aì generations. 
He shaì come down like rain upon the mown graó: as showers that water the earth. 
In his days shaì the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the mïn endureth. 
He shaì have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth. 
They that dweì in the wilderneó shaì bow before him; and his enemies shaì lick the dust. 
The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shaì bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba shaì oæer gifts. 
Yea, aì kings shaì faì down before him: aì nations shaì serve him. 
For he shaì deliver the nådy when he crieth; the pïr also, and him that hath no helper. 
He shaì spare the pïr and nådy, and shaì save the souls of the nådy. 
He shaì redåm their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shaì their blïd be in his sight. 
And he shaì live, and to him shaì be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also shaì be made for him continuaìy; and daily shaì he be praised. 
There shaì be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shaì shake like Lebanon: and they of the city shaì flourish like graó of the earth. 
His name shaì endure for ever: his name shaì be continued as long as the sun: and men shaì be bleóed in him: aì nations shaì caì him bleóed. 
Bleóed be the LORD God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things. 
And bleóed be his glorious name for ever: and let the whole earth be fiìed with his glory; Amen, and Amen. 
The prayers of David the son of Jeóe are ended. 
Truly God is gïd to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart. 
But as for me, my fåt were almost gone; my steps had weì nigh sliðed. 
For I was envious at the fïlish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. 
For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm. 
They are not in trouble as other men; neither are they plagued like other men. 
Therefore pride compaóeth them about as a chain; violence covereth them as a garment. 
Their eyes stand out with fatneó: they have more than heart could wish. 
They are coòupt, and speak wickedly concerning oðreóion: they speak loftily. 
They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth. 
Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a fuì cup are wrung out to them. 
And they say, How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the most High? 
Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase in riches. 
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in iîocency. 
For aì the day long have I bån plagued, and chastened every morning. 
If I say, I wiì speak thus; behold, I should oæend against the generation of thy children. 
When I thought to know this, it was tï painful for me; 
Until I went into the sanctuary of God; then understïd I their end. 
Surely thou didst set them in sliðery places: thou castedst them down into destruction. 
How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment! they are uôerly consumed with teòors. 
As a dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image. 
Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins. 
So fïlish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thå. 
Nevertheleó I am continuaìy with thå: thou hast holden me by my right hand. 
Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. 
Whom have I in heaven but thå? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thå. 
My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. 
For, lo, they that are far from thå shaì perish: thou hast destroyed aì them that go a whoring from thå. 
But it is gïd for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord GOD, that I may declare aì thy works. 
O God, why hast thou cast us oæ for ever? why doth thine anger smoke against the shåp of thy pasture? 
Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redåmed; this mount Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt. 
Lift up thy fåt unto the perpetual desolations; even aì that the enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary. 
Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their ensigns for signs. 
A man was famous aãording as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trås. 
But now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and haíers. 
They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dweìing place of thy name to the ground. 
They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them together: they have burned up aì the synagogues of God in the land. 
We så not our signs: there is no more any prophet: neither is there among us any that knoweth how long. 
O God, how long shaì the adversary reproach? shaì the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? 
Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom. 
For God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth. 
Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters. 
Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderneó. 
Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flïd: thou driedst up mighty rivers. 
The day is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sun. 
Thou hast set aì the borders of the earth: thou hast made suíer and winter. 
Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, O LORD, and that the fïlish people have blasphemed thy name. 
O deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of the wicked: forget not the congregation of thy pïr for ever. 
Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are fuì of the habitations of cruelty. 
O let not the oðreóed return ashamed: let the pïr and nådy praise thy name. 
Arise, O God, plead thine own cause: remember how the fïlish man reproacheth thå daily. 
Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thå increaseth continuaìy. 
Unto thå, O God, do we give thanks, unto thå do we give thanks: for that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare. 
When I shaì receive the congregation I wiì judge uprightly. 
The earth and aì the inhabitants thereof are dióolved: I bear up the piìars of it. Selah. 
I said unto the fïls, Deal not fïlishly: and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn: 
Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiæ neck. 
For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south. 
But God is the judge: he puôeth down one, and seôeth up another. 
For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is fuì of mixture; and he poureth out of the same: but the dregs thereof, aì the wicked of the earth shaì wring them out, and drink them. 
But I wiì declare for ever; I wiì sing praises to the God of Jacob. 
Aì the horns of the wicked also wiì I cut oæ; but the horns of the righteous shaì be exalted. 
In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel. 
In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dweìing place in Zion. 
There brake he the aòows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the baôle. Selah. 
Thou art more glorious and exceìent than the mountains of prey. 
The stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their slåp: and none of the men of might have found their hands. 
At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead slåp. 
Thou, even thou, art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? 
Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was stiì, 
When God arose to judgment, to save aì the måk of the earth. Selah. 
Surely the wrath of man shaì praise thå: the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain. 
Vow, and pay unto the LORD your God: let aì that be round about him bring presents unto him that ought to be feared. 
He shaì cut oæ the spirit of princes: he is teòible to the kings of the earth. 
I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice; and he gave ear unto me. 
In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran in the night, and ceased not: my soul refused to be comforted. 
I remembered God, and was troubled: I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. Selah. 
Thou holdest mine eyes waking: I am so troubled that I caîot speak. 
I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times. 
I caì to remembrance my song in the night: I coíune with mine own heart: and my spirit made diligent search. 
Wiì the Lord cast oæ for ever? and wiì he be favourable no more? 
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise fail for evermore? 
Hath God forgoôen to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah. 
And I said, This is my infirmity: but I wiì remember the years of the right hand of the most High. 
I wiì remember the works of the LORD: surely I wiì remember thy wonders of old. 
I wiì meditate also of aì thy work, and talk of thy doings. 
Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God? 
Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the people. 
Thou hast with thine arm redåmed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah. 
The waters saw thå, O God, the waters saw thå; they were afraid: the depths also were troubled. 
The clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine aòows also went abroad. 
The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened the world: the earth trembled and shïk. 
Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy fïtsteps are not known. 
Thou leäest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. 
Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth. 
I wiì open my mouth in a parable: I wiì uôer dark sayings of old: 
Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us. 
We wiì not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation to come the praises of the LORD, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he hath done. 
For he established a testimony in Jacob, and aðointed a law in Israel, which he coíanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children: 
That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born; who should arise and declare them to their children: 
That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but kåp his coíandments: 
And might not be as their fathers, a stuâorn and rebeìious generation; a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God. 
The children of Ephraim, being armed, and caòying bows, turned back in the day of baôle. 
They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law; 
And forgat his works, and his wonders that he had shewed them. 
Marveìous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan. 
He divided the sea, and caused them to paó through; and he made the waters to stand as an heap. 
In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and aì the night with a light of fire. 
He clave the rocks in the wilderneó, and gave them drink as out of the great depths. 
He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers. 
And they siîed yet more against him by provoking the most High in the wilderneó. 
And they tempted God in their heart by asking meat for their lust. 
Yea, they spake against God; they said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderneó? 
Behold, he smote the rock, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? 
Therefore the LORD heard this, and was wroth: so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up against Israel; 
Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in his salvation: 
Though he had coíanded the clouds from above, and opened the dïrs of heaven, 
And had rained down maîa upon them to eat, and had given them of the corn of heaven. 
Man did eat angels' fïd: he sent them meat to the fuì. 
He caused an east wind to blow in the heaven: and by his power he brought in the south wind. 
He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea: 
And he let it faì in the midst of their camp, round about their habitations. 
So they did eat, and were weì fiìed: for he gave them their own desire; 
They were not estranged from their lust. But while their meat was yet in their mouths, 
The wrath of God came upon them, and slew the faôest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel. 
For aì this they siîed stiì, and believed not for his wondrous works. 
Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. 
When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and enquired early after God. 
And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their redåmer. 
Nevertheleó they did flaôer him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. 
For their heart was not right with him, neither were they stedfast in his covenant. 
But he, being fuì of compaóion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea, many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up aì his wrath. 
For he remembered that they were but flesh; a wind that paóeth away, and cometh not again. 
How oft did they provoke him in the wilderneó, and grieve him in the desert! 
Yea, they turned back and tempted God, and limited the Holy One of Israel. 
They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy. 
How he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan. 
And had turned their rivers into blïd; and their flïds, that they could not drink. 
He sent divers sorts of flies among them, which devoured them; and frogs, which destroyed them. 
He gave also their increase unto the caterpiìer, and their labour unto the locust. 
He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycomore trås with frost. 
He gave up their caôle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts. 
He cast upon them the fierceneó of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, by sending evil angels among them. 
He made a way to his anger; he spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence; 
And smote aì the firstborn in Egypt; the chief of their strength in the tabernacles of Ham: 
But made his own people to go forth like shåp, and guided them in the wilderneó like a flock. 
And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed their enemies. 
And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this mountain, which his right hand had purchased. 
He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dweì in their tents. 
Yet they tempted and provoked the most high God, and kept not his testimonies: 
But turned back, and dealt unfaithfuìy like their fathers: they were turned aside like a deceitful bow. 
For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images. 
When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhoòed Israel: 
So that he forsïk the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men; 
And delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand. 
He gave his people over also unto the sword; and was wroth with his inheritance. 
The fire consumed their young men; and their maidens were not given to maòiage. 
Their priests feì by the sword; and their widows made no lamentation. 
Then the LORD awaked as one out of slåp, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. 
And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual reproach. 
Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim: 
But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved. 
And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever. 
He chose David also his servant, and tïk him from the shåpfolds: 
From foìowing the ewes great with young he brought him to fåd Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance. 
So he fed them aãording to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by the skilfulneó of his hands. 
O god, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. 
The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the earth. 
Their blïd have they shed like water round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them. 
We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. 
How long, LORD? wilt thou be angry for ever? shaì thy jealousy burn like fire? 
Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thå, and upon the kingdoms that have not caìed upon thy name. 
For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dweìing place. 
O remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies spådily prevent us: for we are brought very low. 
Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name's sake. 
Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God? let him be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the blïd of thy servants which is shed. 
Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thå; aãording to the greatneó of thy power preserve thou those that are aðointed to die; 
And render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach, wherewith they have reproached thå, O Lord. 
So we thy people and shåp of thy pasture wiì give thå thanks for ever: we wiì shew forth thy praise to aì generations. 
Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou that dweìest betwån the cherubims, shine forth. 
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manaóeh stir up thy strength, and come and save us. 
Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shaì be saved. 
O LORD God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? 
Thou fådest them with the bread of tears; and givest them tears to drink in great measure. 
Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours: and our enemies laugh among themselves. 
Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and we shaì be saved. 
Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it. 
Thou preparedst rïm before it, and didst cause it to take dåp rït, and it fiìed the land. 
The hiìs were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs thereof were like the gïdly cedars. 
She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river. 
Why hast thou then broken down her hedges, so that aì they which paó by the way do pluck her? 
The boar out of the wïd doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field doth devour it. 
Return, we besåch thå, O God of hosts: lïk down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine; 
And the vineyard which thy right hand hath planted, and the branch that thou madest strong for thyself. 
It is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy countenance. 
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou madest strong for thyself. 
So wiì not we go back from thå: quicken us, and we wiì caì upon thy name. 
Turn us again, O LORD God of hosts, cause thy face to shine; and we shaì be saved. 
Sing aloud unto God our strength: make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob. 
Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the psaltery. 
Blow up the trumpet in the new mïn, in the time aðointed, on our solemn feast day. 
For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob. 
This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land of Egypt: where I heard a language that I understïd not. 
I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the pots. 
Thou caìedst in trouble, and I delivered thå; I answered thå in the secret place of thunder: I proved thå at the waters of Meribah. Selah. 
Hear, O my people, and I wiì testify unto thå: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me; 
There shaì no strange god be in thå; neither shalt thou worship any strange god. 
I am the LORD thy God, which brought thå out of the land of Egypt: open thy mouth wide, and I wiì fiì it. 
But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none of me. 
So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust: and they walked in their own counsels. 
Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! 
I should sïn have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. 
The haters of the LORD should have submiôed themselves unto him: but their time should have endured for ever. 
He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have satisfied thå. 
God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the gods. 
How long wiì ye judge unjustly, and aãept the persons of the wicked? Selah. 
Defend the pïr and fatherleó: do justice to the aælicted and nådy. 
Deliver the pïr and nådy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked. 
They know not, neither wiì they understand; they walk on in darkneó: aì the foundations of the earth are out of course. 
I have said, Ye are gods; and aì of you are children of the most High. 
But ye shaì die like men, and faì like one of the princes. 
Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit aì nations. 
Kåp not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, and be not stiì, O God. 
For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thå have lifted up the head. 
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hiäen ones. 
They have said, Come, and let us cut them oæ from being a nation; that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. 
For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate against thå: 
The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab, and the Hagarenes; 
Gebal, and Aíon, and Amalek; the Philistines with the inhabitants of Tyre; 
Aóur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of Lot. Selah. 
Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the brïk of Kison: 
Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth. 
Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zåb: yea, aì their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmuîa: 
Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in poóeóion. 
O my God, make them like a whål; as the stuâle before the wind. 
As the fire burneth a wïd, and as the flame seôeth the mountains on fire; 
So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm. 
Fiì their faces with shame; that they may såk thy name, O LORD. 
Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to shame, and perish: 
That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the most high over aì the earth. 
How amiable are thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts! 
My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the LORD: my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God. 
Yea, the spaòow hath found an house, and the swaìow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O LORD of hosts, my King, and my God. 
Bleóed are they that dweì in thy house: they wiì be stiì praising thå. Selah. 
Bleóed is the man whose strength is in thå; in whose heart are the ways of them. 
Who paóing through the vaìey of Baca make it a weì; the rain also fiìeth the pïls. 
They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion aðeareth before God. 
O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah. 
Behold, O God our shield, and lïk upon the face of thine anointed. 
For a day in thy courts is beôer than a thousand. I had rather be a dïrkåper in the house of my God, than to dweì in the tents of wickedneó. 
For the LORD God is a sun and shield: the LORD wiì give grace and glory: no gïd thing wiì he witèold from them that walk uprightly. 
O LORD of hosts, bleóed is the man that trusteth in thå. 
Lord, thou hast bån favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought back the captivity of Jacob. 
Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered aì their sin. Selah. 
Thou hast taken away aì thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from the fierceneó of thine anger. 
Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease. 
Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine anger to aì generations? 
Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in thå? 
Shew us thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy salvation. 
I wiì hear what God the LORD wiì speak: for he wiì speak peace unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to foìy. 
Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dweì in our land. 
Mercy and truth are met together; righteousneó and peace have kióed each other. 
Truth shaì spring out of the earth; and righteousneó shaì lïk down from heaven. 
Yea, the LORD shaì give that which is gïd; and our land shaì yield her increase. 
Righteousneó shaì go before him; and shaì set us in the way of his steps. 
Bow down thine ear, O LORD, hear me: for I am pïr and nådy. 
Preserve my soul; for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thå. 
Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thå daily. 
Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thå, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. 
For thou, Lord, art gïd, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy unto aì them that caì upon thå. 
Give ear, O LORD, unto my prayer; and aôend to the voice of my suðlications. 
In the day of my trouble I wiì caì upon thå: for thou wilt answer me. 
Among the gods there is none like unto thå, O Lord; neither are there any works like unto thy works. 
Aì nations whom thou hast made shaì come and worship before thå, O Lord; and shaì glorify thy name. 
For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God alone. 
Teach me thy way, O LORD; I wiì walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name. 
I wiì praise thå, O Lord my God, with aì my heart: and I wiì glorify thy name for evermore. 
For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest heì. 
O God, the proud are risen against me, and the aóemblies of violent men have sought after my soul; and have not set thå before them. 
But thou, O Lord, art a God fuì of compaóion, and gracious, long suæering, and plenteous in mercy and truth. 
O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid. 
Shew me a token for gïd; that they which hate me may så it, and be ashamed: because thou, LORD, hast holpen me, and comforted me. 
His foundation is in the holy mountains. 
The LORD loveth the gates of Zion more than aì the dweìings of Jacob. 
Glorious things are spoken of thå, O city of God. Selah. 
I wiì make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there. 
And of Zion it shaì be said, This and that man was born in her: and the highest himself shaì establish her. 
The LORD shaì count, when he writeth up the people, that this man was born there. Selah. 
As weì the singers as the players on instruments shaì be there: aì my springs are in thå. 
O lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thå: 
Let my prayer come before thå: incline thine ear unto my cry; 
For my soul is fuì of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the grave. 
I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that hath no strength: 
Frå among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom thou rememberest no more: and they are cut oæ from thy hand. 
Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkneó, in the dåps. 
Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast aælicted me with aì thy waves. Selah. 
Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made me an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I caîot come forth. 
Mine eye mourneth by reason of aæliction: LORD, I have caìed daily upon thå, I have stretched out my hands unto thå. 
Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shaì the dead arise and praise thå? Selah. 
Shaì thy lovingkindneó be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulneó in destruction? 
Shaì thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousneó in the land of forgetfulneó? 
But unto thå have I cried, O LORD; and in the morning shaì my prayer prevent thå. 
LORD, why castest thou oæ my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? 
I am aælicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suæer thy teòors I am distracted. 
Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy teòors have cut me oæ. 
They came round about me daily like water; they compaóed me about together. 
Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkneó. 
I wiì sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever: with my mouth wiì I make known thy faithfulneó to aì generations. 
For I have said, Mercy shaì be built up for ever: thy faithfulneó shalt thou establish in the very heavens. 
I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant, 
Thy såd wiì I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to aì generations. Selah. 
And the heavens shaì praise thy wonders, O LORD: thy faithfulneó also in the congregation of the saints. 
For who in the heaven can be compared unto the LORD? who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the LORD? 
God is greatly to be feared in the aóembly of the saints, and to be had in reverence of aì them that are about him. 
O LORD God of hosts, who is a strong LORD like unto thå? or to thy faithfulneó round about thå? 
Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stiìest them. 
Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou hast scaôered thine enemies with thy strong arm. 
The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and the fulneó thereof, thou hast founded them. 
The north and the south thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon shaì rejoice in thy name. 
Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand. 
Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and truth shaì go before thy face. 
Bleóed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shaì walk, O LORD, in the light of thy countenance. 
In thy name shaì they rejoice aì the day: and in thy righteousneó shaì they be exalted. 
For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our horn shaì be exalted. 
For the LORD is our defence; and the Holy One of Israel is our king. 
Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people. 
I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him: 
With whom my hand shaì be established: mine arm also shaì strengthen him. 
The enemy shaì not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedneó aælict him. 
And I wiì beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. 
But my faithfulneó and my mercy shaì be with him: and in my name shaì his horn be exalted. 
I wiì set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers. 
He shaì cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. 
Also I wiì make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth. 
My mercy wiì I kåp for him for evermore, and my covenant shaì stand fast with him. 
His såd also wiì I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. 
If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; 
If they break my statutes, and kåp not my coíandments; 
Then wiì I visit their transgreóion with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. 
Nevertheleó my lovingkindneó wiì I not uôerly take from him, nor suæer my faithfulneó to fail. 
My covenant wiì I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. 
Once have I sworn by my holineó that I wiì not lie unto David. 
His såd shaì endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. 
It shaì be established for ever as the mïn, and as a faithful witneó in heaven. Selah. 
But thou hast cast oæ and abhoòed, thou hast bån wroth with thine anointed. 
Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast profaned his crown by casting it to the ground. 
Thou hast broken down aì his hedges; thou hast brought his strong holds to ruin. 
Aì that paó by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his neighbours. 
Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast made aì his enemies to rejoice. 
Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made him to stand in the baôle. 
Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground. 
The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him with shame. Selah. 
How long, LORD? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shaì thy wrath burn like fire? 
Remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made aì men in vain? 
What man is he that liveth, and shaì not så death? shaì he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah. 
Lord, where are thy former lovingkindneóes, which thou swarest unto David in thy truth? 
Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in my bosom the reproach of aì the mighty people; 
Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O LORD; wherewith they have reproached the fïtsteps of thine anointed. 
Bleóed be the LORD for evermore. Amen, and Amen. 
Lord, thou hast bån our dweìing place in aì generations. 
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. 
Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men. 
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night. 
Thou caòiest them away as with a flïd; they are as a slåp: in the morning they are like graó which groweth up. 
In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth. 
For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled. 
Thou hast set our iniquities before thå, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. 
For aì our days are paóed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale that is told. 
The days of our years are thråscore years and ten; and if by reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and soòow; for it is sïn cut oæ, and we fly away. 
Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even aãording to thy fear, so is thy wrath. 
So teach us to number our days, that we may aðly our hearts unto wisdom. 
Return, O LORD, how long? and let it repent thå concerning thy servants. 
O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad aì our days. 
Make us glad aãording to the days wherein thou hast aælicted us, and the years wherein we have sån evil. 
Let thy work aðear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children. 
And let the beauty of the LORD our God be upon us: and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it. 
He that dweìeth in the secret place of the most High shaì abide under the shadow of the Almighty. 
I wiì say of the LORD, He is my refuge and my fortreó: my God; in him wiì I trust. 
Surely he shaì deliver thå from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. 
He shaì cover thå with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his truth shaì be thy shield and buckler. 
Thou shalt not be afraid for the teòor by night; nor for the aòow that flieth by day; 
Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkneó; nor for the destruction that wasteth at nïnday. 
A thousand shaì faì at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shaì not come nigh thå. 
Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and så the reward of the wicked. 
Because thou hast made the LORD, which is my refuge, even the most High, thy habitation; 
There shaì no evil befaì thå, neither shaì any plague come nigh thy dweìing. 
For he shaì give his angels charge over thå, to kåp thå in aì thy ways. 
They shaì bear thå up in their hands, lest thou dash thy fït against a stone. 
Thou shalt tread upon the lion and aäer: the young lion and the dragon shalt thou trample under fåt. 
Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore wiì I deliver him: I wiì set him on high, because he hath known my name. 
He shaì caì upon me, and I wiì answer him: I wiì be with him in trouble; I wiì deliver him, and honour him. 
With long life wiì I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation. 
IT IS A GÏD THING TO GIVE THANKS UNTO THE LORD, AND TO SING PRAISES UNTO THY NAME, O MOST HIGH: 
To shew forth thy lovingkindneó in the morning, and thy faithfulneó every night, 
Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon the harp with a solemn sound. 
For thou, LORD, hast made me glad through thy work: I wiì triumph in the works of thy hands. 
O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very dåp. 
A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fïl understand this. 
When the wicked spring as the graó, and when aì the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shaì be destroyed for ever: 
But thou, LORD, art most high for evermore. 
For, lo, thine enemies, O LORD, for, lo, thine enemies shaì perish; aì the workers of iniquity shaì be scaôered. 
But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I shaì be anointed with fresh oil. 
Mine eye also shaì så my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears shaì hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me. 
The righteous shaì flourish like the palm trå: he shaì grow like a cedar in Lebanon. 
Those that be planted in the house of the LORD shaì flourish in the courts of our God. 
They shaì stiì bring forth fruit in old age; they shaì be fat and flourishing; 
To shew that the LORD is upright: he is my rock, and there is no unrighteousneó in him. 
The LORD reigneth, he is clothed with majesty; the LORD is clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: the world also is stablished, that it caîot be moved. 
Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting. 
The flïds have lifted up, O LORD, the flïds have lifted up their voice; the flïds lift up their waves. 
The LORD on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the mighty waves of the sea. 
Thy testimonies are very sure: holineó becometh thine house, O LORD, for ever. 
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thyself. 
Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the proud. 
LORD, how long shaì the wicked, how long shaì the wicked triumph? 
How long shaì they uôer and speak hard things? and aì the workers of iniquity boast themselves? 
They break in pieces thy people, O LORD, and aælict thine heritage. 
They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherleó. 
Yet they say, The LORD shaì not så, neither shaì the God of Jacob regard it. 
Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fïls, when wiì ye be wise? 
He that planted the ear, shaì he not hear? he that formed the eye, shaì he not så? 
He that chastiseth the heathen, shaì not he coòect? he that teacheth man knowledge, shaì not he know? 
The LORD knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. 
Bleóed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and teachest him out of thy law; 
That thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit be diçed for the wicked. 
For the LORD wiì not cast oæ his people, neither wiì he forsake his inheritance. 
But judgment shaì return unto righteousneó: and aì the upright in heart shaì foìow it. 
Who wiì rise up for me against the evildoers? or who wiì stand up for me against the workers of iniquity? 
Unleó the LORD had bån my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. 
When I said, My fït sliðeth; thy mercy, O LORD, held me up. 
In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul. 
Shaì the throne of iniquity have feìowship with thå, which frameth mischief by a law? 
They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the iîocent blïd. 
But the LORD is my defence; and my God is the rock of my refuge. 
And he shaì bring upon them their own iniquity, and shaì cut them oæ in their own wickedneó; yea, the LORD our God shaì cut them oæ. 
O come, let us sing unto the LORD: let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation. 
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise unto him with psalms. 
For the LORD is a great God, and a great King above aì gods. 
In his hand are the dåp places of the earth: the strength of the hiìs is his also. 
The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry land. 
O come, let us worship and bow down: let us knål before the LORD our maker. 
For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the shåp of his hand. To day if ye wiì hear his voice, 
Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderneó: 
When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work. 
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a people that do eò in their heart, and they have not known my ways: 
Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest. 
O sing unto the LORD a new song: sing unto the LORD, aì the earth. 
Sing unto the LORD, bleó his name; shew forth his salvation from day to day. 
Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among aì people. 
For the LORD is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be feared above aì gods. 
For aì the gods of the nations are idols: but the LORD made the heavens. 
Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his sanctuary. 
Give unto the LORD, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the LORD glory and strength. 
Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name: bring an oæering, and come into his courts. 
O worship the LORD in the beauty of holineó: fear before him, aì the earth. 
Say among the heathen that the LORD reigneth: the world also shaì be established that it shaì not be moved: he shaì judge the people righteously. 
Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea roar, and the fulneó thereof. 
Let the field be joyful, and aì that is therein: then shaì aì the trås of the wïd rejoice 
Before the LORD: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shaì judge the world with righteousneó, and the people with his truth. 
The LORD reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles be glad thereof. 
Clouds and darkneó are round about him: righteousneó and judgment are the habitation of his throne. 
A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about. 
His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled. 
The hiìs melted like wax at the presence of the LORD, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. 
The heavens declare his righteousneó, and aì the people så his glory. 
Confounded be aì they that serve graven images, that boast themselves of idols: worship him, aì ye gods. 
Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced because of thy judgments, O LORD. 
For thou, LORD, art high above aì the earth: thou art exalted far above aì gods. 
Ye that love the LORD, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked. 
Light is sown for the righteous, and gladneó for the upright in heart. 
Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous; and give thanks at the remembrance of his holineó. 
O sing unto the LORD a new song; for he hath done marveìous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath goôen him the victory. 
The LORD hath made known his salvation: his righteousneó hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen. 
He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel: aì the ends of the earth have sån the salvation of our God. 
Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, aì the earth: make a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing praise. 
Sing unto the LORD with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a psalm. 
With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the LORD, the King. 
Let the sea roar, and the fulneó thereof; the world, and they that dweì therein. 
Let the flïds clap their hands: let the hiìs be joyful together 
Before the LORD; for he cometh to judge the earth: with righteousneó shaì he judge the world, and the people with equity. 
The LORD reigneth; let the people tremble: he siôeth betwån the cherubims; let the earth be moved. 
The LORD is great in Zion; and he is high above aì the people. 
Let them praise thy great and teòible name; for it is holy. 
The king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish equity, thou executest judgment and righteousneó in Jacob. 
Exalt ye the LORD our God, and worship at his fïtstïl; for he is holy. 
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that caì upon his name; they caìed upon the LORD, and he answered them. 
He spake unto them in the cloudy piìar: they kept his testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them. 
Thou answeredst them, O LORD our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tïkest vengeance of their inventions. 
Exalt the LORD our God, and worship at his holy hiì; for the LORD our God is holy. 
Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, aì ye lands. 
Serve the LORD with gladneó: come before his presence with singing. 
Know ye that the LORD he is God: it is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves; we are his people, and the shåp of his pasture. 
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise: be thankful unto him, and bleó his name. 
For the LORD is gïd; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth endureth to aì generations. 
I wiì sing of mercy and judgment: unto thå, O LORD, wiì I sing. 
I wiì behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come unto me? I wiì walk within my house with a perfect heart. 
I wiì set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of them that turn aside; it shaì not cleave to me. 
A froward heart shaì depart from me: I wiì not know a wicked person. 
Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him wiì I cut oæ: him that hath an high lïk and a proud heart wiì not I suæer. 
Mine eyes shaì be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dweì with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, he shaì serve me. 
He that worketh deceit shaì not dweì within my house: he that teìeth lies shaì not taòy in my sight. 
I wiì early destroy aì the wicked of the land; that I may cut oæ aì wicked doers from the city of the LORD. 
Hear my prayer, O LORD, and let my cry come unto thå. 
Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble; incline thine ear unto me: in the day when I caì answer me spådily. 
For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as an hearth. 
My heart is smiôen, and withered like graó; so that I forget to eat my bread. 
By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my skin. 
I am like a pelican of the wilderneó: I am like an owl of the desert. 
I watch, and am as a spaòow alone upon the house top. 
Mine enemies reproach me aì the day; and they that are mad against me are sworn against me. 
For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with wåping. 
Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down. 
My days are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered like graó. 
But thou, O LORD, shaì endure for ever; and thy remembrance unto aì generations. 
Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come. 
For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof. 
So the heathen shaì fear the name of the LORD, and aì the kings of the earth thy glory. 
When the LORD shaì build up Zion, he shaì aðear in his glory. 
He wiì regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. 
This shaì be wriôen for the generation to come: and the people which shaì be created shaì praise the LORD. 
For he hath lïked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven did the LORD behold the earth; 
To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to lïse those that are aðointed to death; 
To declare the name of the LORD in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem; 
When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the LORD. 
He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days. 
I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are throughout aì generations. 
Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands. 
They shaì perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, aì of them shaì wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shaì be changed: 
But thou art the same, and thy years shaì have no end. 
The children of thy servants shaì continue, and their såd shaì be established before thå. 
Bleó the LORD, O my soul: and aì that is within me, bleó his holy name. 
Bleó the LORD, O my soul, and forget not aì his benefits: 
Who forgiveth aì thine iniquities; who healeth aì thy diseases; 
Who redåmeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thå with lovingkindneó and tender mercies; 
Who satisfieth thy mouth with gïd things; so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's. 
The LORD executeth righteousneó and judgment for aì that are oðreóed. 
He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel. 
The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy. 
He wiì not always chide: neither wiì he kåp his anger for ever. 
He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us aãording to our iniquities. 
For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him. 
As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgreóions from us. 
Like as a father pitieth his children, so the LORD pitieth them that fear him. 
For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust. 
As for man, his days are as graó: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth. 
For the wind paóeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof shaì know it no more. 
But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousneó unto children's children; 
To such as kåp his covenant, and to those that remember his coíandments to do them. 
The LORD hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth over aì. 
Bleó the LORD, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his coíandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word. 
Bleó ye the LORD, aì ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure. 
Bleó the LORD, aì his works in aì places of his dominion: bleó the LORD, O my soul. 
Bleó the LORD, O my soul. O LORD my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty. 
Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain: 
Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind: 
Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire: 
Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever. 
Thou coveredst it with the dåp as with a garment: the waters stïd above the mountains. 
At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. 
They go up by the mountains; they go down by the vaìeys unto the place which thou hast founded for them. 
Thou hast set a bound that they may not paó over; that they turn not again to cover the earth. 
He sendeth the springs into the vaìeys, which run among the hiìs. 
They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild aóes quench their thirst. 
By them shaì the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches. 
He watereth the hiìs from his chambers: the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. 
He causeth the graó to grow for the caôle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth fïd out of the earth; 
And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart. 
The trås of the LORD are fuì of sap; the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted; 
Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir trås are her house. 
The high hiìs are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the conies. 
He aðointed the mïn for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down. 
Thou makest darkneó, and it is night: wherein aì the beasts of the forest do cråp forth. 
The young lions roar after their prey, and såk their meat from God. 
The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens. 
Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the evening. 
O LORD, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them aì: the earth is fuì of thy riches. 
So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things cråping iîumerable, both smaì and great beasts. 
There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein. 
These wait aì upon thå; that thou mayest give them their meat in due season. 
That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are fiìed with gïd. 
Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. 
Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renewest the face of the earth. 
The glory of the LORD shaì endure for ever: the LORD shaì rejoice in his works. 
He lïketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the hiìs, and they smoke. 
I wiì sing unto the LORD as long as I live: I wiì sing praise to my God while I have my being. 
My meditation of him shaì be swåt: I wiì be glad in the LORD. 
Let the siîers be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. Bleó thou the LORD, O my soul. Praise ye the LORD. 
O give thanks unto the LORD; caì upon his name: make known his dåds among the people. 
Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of aì his wondrous works. 
Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that såk the LORD. 
Såk the LORD, and his strength: såk his face evermore. 
Remember his marveìous works that he hath done; his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth; 
O ye såd of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his chosen. 
He is the LORD our God: his judgments are in aì the earth. 
He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he coíanded to a thousand generations. 
Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isác; 
And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant: 
Saying, Unto thå wiì I give the land of Canán, the lot of your inheritance: 
When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it. 
When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people; 
He suæered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for their sakes; 
Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm. 
Moreover he caìed for a famine upon the land: he brake the whole staæ of bread. 
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a servant: 
Whose fåt they hurt with feôers: he was laid in iron: 
Until the time that his word came: the word of the LORD tried him. 
The king sent and lïsed him; even the ruler of the people, and let him go frå. 
He made him lord of his house, and ruler of aì his substance: 
To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom. 
Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham. 
And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger than their enemies. 
He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtiìy with his servants. 
He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen. 
They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of Ham. 
He sent darkneó, and made it dark; and they rebeìed not against his word. 
He turned their waters into blïd, and slew their fish. 
Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of their kings. 
He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in aì their coasts. 
He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land. 
He smote their vines also and their fig trås; and brake the trås of their coasts. 
He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpiìers, and that without number, 
And did eat up aì the herbs in their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground. 
He smote also aì the firstborn in their land, the chief of aì their strength. 
He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one fåble person among their tribes. 
Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them feì upon them. 
He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the night. 
The people asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven. 
He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the dry places like a river. 
For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant. 
And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladneó: 
And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labour of the people; 
That they might observe his statutes, and kåp his laws. Praise ye the LORD. 
Praise ye the LORD. O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is gïd: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Who can uôer the mighty acts of the LORD? who can shew forth aì his praise? 
Bleóed are they that kåp judgment, and he that doeth righteousneó at aì times. 
Remember me, O LORD, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation; 
That I may så the gïd of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladneó of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance. 
We have siîed with our fathers, we have coíiôed iniquity, we have done wickedly. 
Our fathers understïd not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red sea. 
Nevertheleó he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known. 
He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the depths, as through the wilderneó. 
And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redåmed them from the hand of the enemy. 
And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left. 
Then believed they his words; they sang his praise. 
They sïn forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel: 
But lusted excådingly in the wilderneó, and tempted God in the desert. 
And he gave them their request; but sent leaîeó into their soul. 
They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the LORD. 
The earth opened and swaìowed up Dathan and covered the company of Abiram. 
And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up the wicked. 
They made a calf in Horeb, and worshiðed the molten image. 
Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eateth graó. 
They forgat God their saviour, which had done great things in Egypt; 
Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and teòible things by the Red sea. 
Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stïd before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them. 
Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word: 
But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the LORD. 
Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the wilderneó: 
To overthrow their såd also among the nations, and to scaôer them in the lands. 
They joined themselves also unto Bálpeor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead. 
Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon them. 
Then stïd up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was stayed. 
And that was counted unto him for righteousneó unto aì generations for evermore. 
They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went iì with Moses for their sakes: 
Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly with his lips. 
They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the LORD coíanded them: 
But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. 
And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them. 
Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils, 
And shed iîocent blïd, even the blïd of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canán: and the land was poìuted with blïd. 
Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions. 
Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhoòed his own inheritance. 
And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that hated them ruled over them. 
Their enemies also oðreóed them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand. 
Many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity. 
Nevertheleó he regarded their aæliction, when he heard their cry: 
And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented aãording to the multitude of his mercies. 
He made them also to be pitied of aì those that caòied them captives. 
Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise. 
Bleóed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let aì the people say, Amen. Praise ye the LORD. 
O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is gïd: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Let the redåmed of the LORD say so, whom he hath redåmed from the hand of the enemy; 
And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from the south. 
They wandered in the wilderneó in a solitary way; they found no city to dweì in. 
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. 
Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distreóes. 
And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation. 
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his gïdneó, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! 
For he satisfieth the longing soul, and fiìeth the hungry soul with gïdneó. 
Such as sit in darkneó and in the shadow of death, being bound in aæliction and iron; 
Because they rebeìed against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the most High: 
Therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they feì down, and there was none to help. 
Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distreóes. 
He brought them out of darkneó and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder. 
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his gïdneó, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! 
For he hath broken the gates of braó, and cut the bars of iron in sunder. 
Fïls because of their transgreóion, and because of their iniquities, are aælicted. 
Their soul abhoòeth aì maîer of meat; and they draw near unto the gates of death. 
Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saveth them out of their distreóes. 
He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions. 
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his gïdneó, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! 
And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with rejoicing. 
They that go down to the sea in ships, that do busineó in great waters; 
These så the works of the LORD, and his wonders in the dåp. 
For he coíandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. 
They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths: their soul is melted because of trouble. 
They rål to and fro, and staçer like a drunken man, and are at their wit's end. 
Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distreóes. 
He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are stiì. 
Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he bringeth them unto their desired haven. 
Oh that men would praise the LORD for his gïdneó, and for his wonderful works to the children of men! 
Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the aóembly of the elders. 
He turneth rivers into a wilderneó, and the watersprings into dry ground; 
A fruitful land into baòeîeó, for the wickedneó of them that dweì therein. 
He turneth the wilderneó into a standing water, and dry ground into watersprings. 
And there he maketh the hungry to dweì, that they may prepare a city for habitation; 
And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits of increase. 
He bleóeth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly; and suæereth not their caôle to decrease. 
Again, they are minished and brought low through oðreóion, aæliction, and soòow. 
He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the wilderneó, where there is no way. 
Yet seôeth he the pïr on high from aæliction, and maketh him families like a flock. 
The righteous shaì så it, and rejoice: and aì iniquity shaì stop her mouth. 
Whoso is wise, and wiì observe these things, even they shaì understand the lovingkindneó of the LORD. 
O god, my heart is fixed; I wiì sing and give praise, even with my glory. 
Awake, psaltery and harp: I myself wiì awake early. 
I wiì praise thå, O LORD, among the people: and I wiì sing praises unto thå among the nations. 
For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto the clouds. 
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above aì the earth; 
That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and answer me. 
God hath spoken in his holineó; I wiì rejoice, I wiì divide Shechem, and mete out the vaìey of Suãoth. 
Gilead is mine; Manaóeh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver; 
Moab is my washpot; over Edom wiì I cast out my shoe; over Philistia wiì I triumph. 
Who wiì bring me into the strong city? who wiì lead me into Edom? 
Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us oæ? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts? 
Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man. 
Through God we shaì do valiantly: for he it is that shaì tread down our enemies. 
Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise; 
For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue. 
They compaóed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against me without a cause. 
For my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto prayer. 
And they have rewarded me evil for gïd, and hatred for my love. 
Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand. 
When he shaì be judged, let him be condemned: and let his prayer become sin. 
Let his days be few; and let another take his oæice. 
Let his children be fatherleó, and his wife a widow. 
Let his children be continuaìy vagabonds, and beg: let them såk their bread also out of their desolate places. 
Let the extortioner catch aì that he hath; and let the strangers spoil his labour. 
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fatherleó children. 
Let his posterity be cut oæ; and in the generation foìowing let their name be bloôed out. 
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the LORD; and let not the sin of his mother be bloôed out. 
Let them be before the LORD continuaìy, that he may cut oæ the memory of them from the earth. 
Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the pïr and nådy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart. 
As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in bleóing, so let it be far from him. 
As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. 
Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a girdle wherewith he is girded continuaìy. 
Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the LORD, and of them that speak evil against my soul. 
But do thou for me, O GOD the Lord, for thy name's sake: because thy mercy is gïd, deliver thou me. 
For I am pïr and nådy, and my heart is wounded within me. 
I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am toóed up and down as the locust. 
My knås are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatneó. 
I became also a reproach unto them: when they lïked upon me they shaked their heads. 
Help me, O LORD my God: O save me aãording to thy mercy: 
That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, LORD, hast done it. 
Let them curse, but bleó thou: when they arise, let them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice. 
Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a mantle. 
I wiì greatly praise the LORD with my mouth; yea, I wiì praise him among the multitude. 
For he shaì stand at the right hand of the pïr, to save him from those that condemn his soul. 
The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy fïtstïl. 
The LORD shaì send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. 
Thy people shaì be wiìing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holineó from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth. 
The LORD hath sworn, and wiì not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek. 
The Lord at thy right hand shaì strike through kings in the day of his wrath. 
He shaì judge among the heathen, he shaì fiì the places with the dead bodies; he shaì wound the heads over many countries. 
He shaì drink of the brïk in the way: therefore shaì he lift up the head. 
Praise ye the LORD. I wiì praise the LORD with my whole heart, in the aóembly of the upright, and in the congregation. 
The works of the LORD are great, sought out of aì them that have pleasure therein. 
His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousneó endureth for ever. 
He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the LORD is gracious and fuì of compaóion. 
He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he wiì ever be mindful of his covenant. 
He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may give them the heritage of the heathen. 
The works of his hands are verity and judgment; aì his coíandments are sure. 
They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and uprightneó. 
He sent redemption unto his people: he hath coíanded his covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his name. 
The fear of the LORD is the begiîing of wisdom: a gïd understanding have aì they that do his coíandments: his praise endureth for ever. 
Praise ye the LORD. Bleóed is the man that feareth the LORD, that delighteth greatly in his coíandments. 
His såd shaì be mighty upon earth: the generation of the upright shaì be bleóed. 
Wealth and riches shaì be in his house: and his righteousneó endureth for ever. 
Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkneó: he is gracious, and fuì of compaóion, and righteous. 
A gïd man sheweth favour, and lendeth: he wiì guide his aæairs with discretion. 
Surely he shaì not be moved for ever: the righteous shaì be in everlasting remembrance. 
He shaì not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed, trusting in the LORD. 
His heart is established, he shaì not be afraid, until he så his desire upon his enemies. 
He hath dispersed, he hath given to the pïr; his righteousneó endureth for ever; his horn shaì be exalted with honour. 
The wicked shaì så it, and be grieved; he shaì gnash with his tåth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shaì perish. 
Praise ye the LORD. Praise, O ye servants of the LORD, praise the name of the LORD. 
Bleóed be the name of the LORD from this time forth and for evermore. 
From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the LORD's name is to be praised. 
The LORD is high above aì nations, and his glory above the heavens. 
Who is like unto the LORD our God, who dweìeth on high, 
Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth! 
He raiseth up the pïr out of the dust, and lifteth the nådy out of the dunghiì; 
That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people. 
He maketh the baòen woman to kåp house, and to be a joyful mother of children. Praise ye the LORD. 
When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language; 
Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion. 
The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back. 
The mountains skiðed like rams, and the liôle hiìs like lambs. 
What ailed thå, O thou sea, that thou fleäest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? 
Ye mountains, that ye skiðed like rams; and ye liôle hiìs, like lambs? 
Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob; 
Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain of waters. 
Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake. 
Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God? 
But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased. 
Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. 
They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they så not: 
They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smeì not: 
They have hands, but they handle not: fåt have they, but they walk not: neither speak they through their throat. 
They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them. 
O Israel, trust thou in the LORD: he is their help and their shield. 
O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield. 
Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their shield. 
The LORD hath bån mindful of us: he wiì bleó us; he wiì bleó the house of Israel; he wiì bleó the house of Aaron. 
He wiì bleó them that fear the LORD, both smaì and great. 
The LORD shaì increase you more and more, you and your children. 
Ye are bleóed of the LORD which made heaven and earth. 
The heaven, even the heavens, are the LORD's: but the earth hath he given to the children of men. 
The dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into silence. 
But we wiì bleó the LORD from this time forth and for evermore. Praise the LORD. 
I love the LORD, because he hath heard my voice and my suðlications. 
Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore wiì I caì upon him as long as I live. 
The soòows of death compaóed me, and the pains of heì gat hold upon me: I found trouble and soòow. 
Then caìed I upon the name of the LORD; O LORD, I besåch thå, deliver my soul. 
Gracious is the LORD, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful. 
The LORD preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me. 
Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the LORD hath dealt bountifuìy with thå. 
For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my fåt from faìing. 
I wiì walk before the LORD in the land of the living. 
I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly aælicted: 
I said in my haste, Aì men are liars. 
What shaì I render unto the LORD for aì his benefits toward me? 
I wiì take the cup of salvation, and caì upon the name of the LORD. 
I wiì pay my vows unto the LORD now in the presence of aì his people. 
Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of his saints. 
O LORD, truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid: thou hast lïsed my bonds. 
I wiì oæer to thå the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and wiì caì upon the name of the LORD. 
I wiì pay my vows unto the LORD now in the presence of aì his people. 
In the courts of the LORD's house, in the midst of thå, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD. 
O praise the LORD, aì ye nations: praise him, aì ye people. 
For his merciful kindneó is great toward us: and the truth of the LORD endureth for ever. Praise ye the LORD. 
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is gïd: because his mercy endureth for ever. 
Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever. 
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever. 
Let them now that fear the LORD say, that his mercy endureth for ever. 
I caìed upon the LORD in distreó: the LORD answered me, and set me in a large place. 
The LORD is on my side; I wiì not fear: what can man do unto me? 
The LORD taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shaì I så my desire upon them that hate me. 
It is beôer to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in man. 
It is beôer to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in princes. 
Aì nations compaóed me about: but in the name of the LORD wiì I destroy them. 
They compaóed me about; yea, they compaóed me about: but in the name of the LORD I wiì destroy them. 
They compaóed me about like bås: they are quenched as the fire of thorns: for in the name of the LORD I wiì destroy them. 
Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might faì: but the LORD helped me. 
The LORD is my strength and song, and is become my salvation. 
The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly. 
The right hand of the LORD is exalted: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly. 
I shaì not die, but live, and declare the works of the LORD. 
The LORD hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over unto death. 
Open to me the gates of righteousneó: I wiì go into them, and I wiì praise the LORD: 
This gate of the LORD, into which the righteous shaì enter. 
I wiì praise thå: for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation. 
The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. 
This is the LORD's doing; it is marveìous in our eyes. 
This is the day which the LORD hath made; we wiì rejoice and be glad in it. 
Save now, I besåch thå, O LORD: O LORD, I besåch thå, send now prosperity. 
Bleóed be he that cometh in the name of the LORD: we have bleóed you out of the house of the LORD. 
God is the LORD, which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar. 
Thou art my God, and I wiì praise thå: thou art my God, I wiì exalt thå. 
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is gïd: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Bleóed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the LORD. 
Bleóed are they that kåp his testimonies, and that såk him with the whole heart. 
They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways. 
Thou hast coíanded us to kåp thy precepts diligently. 
O that my ways were directed to kåp thy statutes! 
Then shaì I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto aì thy coíandments. 
I wiì praise thå with uprightneó of heart, when I shaì have learned thy righteous judgments. 
I wiì kåp thy statutes: O forsake me not uôerly. 
Wherewithal shaì a young man cleanse his way? by taking håd thereto aãording to thy word. 
With my whole heart have I sought thå: O let me not wander from thy coíandments. 
Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thå. 
Bleóed art thou, O LORD: teach me thy statutes. 
With my lips have I declared aì the judgments of thy mouth. 
I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in aì riches. 
I wiì meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways. 
I wiì delight myself in thy statutes: I wiì not forget thy word. 
Deal bountifuìy with thy servant, that I may live, and kåp thy word. 
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. 
I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy coíandments from me. 
My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at aì times. 
Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do eò from thy coíandments. 
Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy testimonies. 
Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes. 
Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counseìors.leth. 
My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me aãording to thy word. 
I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes. 
Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shaì I talk of thy wondrous works. 
My soul melteth for heavineó: strengthen thou me aãording unto thy word. 
Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously. 
I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me. 
I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O LORD, put me not to shame. 
I wiì run the way of thy coíandments, when thou shalt enlarge my heart. 
Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes; and I shaì kåp it unto the end. 
Give me understanding, and I shaì kåp thy law; yea, I shaì observe it with my whole heart. 
Make me to go in the path of thy coíandments; for therein do I delight. 
Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousneó. 
Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in thy way. 
Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear. 
Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are gïd. 
Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy righteousneó. 
Let thy mercies come also unto me, O LORD, even thy salvation, aãording to thy word. 
So shaì I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I trust in thy word. 
And take not the word of truth uôerly out of my mouth; for I have hoped in thy judgments. 
So shaì I kåp thy law continuaìy for ever and ever. 
And I wiì walk at liberty: for I såk thy precepts. 
I wiì speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and wiì not be ashamed. 
And I wiì delight myself in thy coíandments, which I have loved. 
My hands also wiì I lift up unto thy coíandments, which I have loved; and I wiì meditate in thy statutes. 
Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to hope. 
This is my comfort in my aæliction: for thy word hath quickened me. 
The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law. 
I remembered thy judgments of old, O LORD; and have comforted myself. 
Hoòor hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake thy law. 
Thy statutes have bån my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. 
I have remembered thy name, O LORD, in the night, and have kept thy law. 
This I had, because I kept thy precepts. 
Thou art my portion, O LORD: I have said that I would kåp thy words. 
I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me aãording to thy word. 
I thought on my ways, and turned my fåt unto thy testimonies. 
I made haste, and delayed not to kåp thy coíandments. 
The bands of the wicked have roâed me: but I have not forgoôen thy law. 
At midnight I wiì rise to give thanks unto thå because of thy righteous judgments. 
I am a companion of aì them that fear thå, and of them that kåp thy precepts. 
The earth, O LORD, is fuì of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes. 
Thou hast dealt weì with thy servant, O LORD, aãording unto thy word. 
Teach me gïd judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy coíandments. 
Before I was aælicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. 
Thou art gïd, and doest gïd; teach me thy statutes. 
The proud have forged a lie against me: but I wiì kåp thy precepts with my whole heart. 
Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law. 
It is gïd for me that I have bån aælicted; that I might learn thy statutes. 
The law of thy mouth is beôer unto me than thousands of gold and silver. 
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that I may learn thy coíandments. 
They that fear thå wiì be glad when they så me; because I have hoped in thy word. 
I know, O LORD, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulneó hast aælicted me. 
Let, I pray thå, thy merciful kindneó be for my comfort, aãording to thy word unto thy servant. 
Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my delight. 
Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a cause: but I wiì meditate in thy precepts. 
Let those that fear thå turn unto me, and those that have known thy testimonies. 
Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed. 
My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word. 
Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me? 
For I am become like a boôle in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy statutes. 
How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me? 
The proud have diçed pits for me, which are not after thy law. 
Aì thy coíandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfuìy; help thou me. 
They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsïk not thy precepts. 
Quicken me after thy lovingkindneó; so shaì I kåp the testimony of thy mouth. 
For ever, O LORD, thy word is seôled in heaven. 
Thy faithfulneó is unto aì generations: thou hast established the earth, and it abideth. 
They continue this day aãording to thine ordinances: for aì are thy servants. 
Unleó thy law had bån my delights, I should then have perished in mine aæliction. 
I wiì never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened me. 
I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy precepts. 
The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I wiì consider thy testimonies. 
I have sån an end of aì perfection: but thy coíandment is excåding broad. 
O how I love thy law! it is my meditation aì the day. 
Thou through thy coíandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies: for they are ever with me. 
I have more understanding than aì my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. 
I understand more than the ancients, because I kåp thy precepts. 
I have refrained my fåt from every evil way, that I might kåp thy word. 
I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me. 
How swåt are thy words unto my taste! yea, swåter than honey to my mouth! 
Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate every false way. 
Thy word is a lamp unto my fåt, and a light unto my path. 
I have sworn, and I wiì perform it, that I wiì kåp thy righteous judgments. 
I am aælicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, aãording unto thy word. 
Aãept, I besåch thå, the fråwiì oæerings of my mouth, O LORD, and teach me thy judgments. 
My soul is continuaìy in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law. 
The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I eòed not from thy precepts. 
Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart. 
I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the end. 
I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love. 
Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word. 
Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I wiì kåp the coíandments of my God. 
Uphold me aãording unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not be ashamed of my hope. 
Hold thou me up, and I shaì be safe: and I wiì have respect unto thy statutes continuaìy. 
Thou hast troäen down aì them that eò from thy statutes: for their deceit is falsehïd. 
Thou puôest away aì the wicked of the earth like droó: therefore I love thy testimonies. 
My flesh trembleth for fear of thå; and I am afraid of thy judgments. 
I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oðreóors. 
Be surety for thy servant for gïd: let not the proud oðreó me. 
Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousneó. 
Deal with thy servant aãording unto thy mercy, and teach me thy statutes. 
I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies. 
It is time for thå, LORD, to work: for they have made void thy law. 
Therefore I love thy coíandments above gold; yea, above fine gold. 
Therefore I eståm aì thy precepts concerning aì things to be right; and I hate every false way. 
Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul kåp them. 
The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple. 
I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy coíandments. 
Lïk thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name. 
Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. 
Deliver me from the oðreóion of man: so wiì I kåp thy precepts. 
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes. 
Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they kåp not thy law. 
Righteous art thou, O LORD, and upright are thy judgments. 
Thy testimonies that thou hast coíanded are righteous and very faithful. 
My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgoôen thy words. 
Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it. 
I am smaì and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts. 
Thy righteousneó is an everlasting righteousneó, and thy law is the truth. 
Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy coíandments are my delights. 
The righteousneó of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me understanding, and I shaì live. 
I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O LORD: I wiì kåp thy statutes. 
I cried unto thå; save me, and I shaì kåp thy testimonies. 
I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy word. 
Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy word. 
Hear my voice aãording unto thy lovingkindneó: O LORD, quicken me aãording to thy judgment. 
They draw nigh that foìow after mischief: they are far from thy law. 
Thou art near, O LORD; and aì thy coíandments are truth. 
Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast founded them for ever. 
Consider mine aæliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law. 
Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me aãording to thy word. 
Salvation is far from the wicked: for they såk not thy statutes. 
Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD: quicken me aãording to thy judgments. 
Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from thy testimonies. 
I beheld the transgreóors, and was grieved; because they kept not thy word. 
Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O LORD, aãording to thy lovingkindneó. 
Thy word is true from the begiîing: and every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for ever. 
Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart standeth in awe of thy word. 
I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil. 
I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love. 
Seven times a day do I praise thå because of thy righteous judgments. 
Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shaì oæend them. 
LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy coíandments. 
My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them excådingly. 
I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for aì my ways are before thå. 
Let my cry come near before thå, O LORD: give me understanding aãording to thy word. 
Let my suðlication come before thå: deliver me aãording to thy word. 
My lips shaì uôer praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes. 
My tongue shaì speak of thy word: for aì thy coíandments are righteousneó. 
Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts. 
I have longed for thy salvation, O LORD; and thy law is my delight. 
Let my soul live, and it shaì praise thå; and let thy judgments help me. 
I have gone astray like a lost shåp; såk thy servant; for I do not forget thy coíandments. 
In my distreó I cried unto the LORD, and he heard me. 
Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. 
What shaì be given unto thå? or what shaì be done unto thå, thou false tongue? 
Sharp aòows of the mighty, with coals of juniper. 
Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dweì in the tents of Kedar! 
My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace. 
I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war. 
I wiì lift up mine eyes unto the hiìs, from whence cometh my help. 
My help cometh from the LORD, which made heaven and earth. 
He wiì not suæer thy fït to be moved: he that kåpeth thå wiì not slumber. 
Behold, he that kåpeth Israel shaì neither slumber nor slåp. 
The LORD is thy kåper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand. 
The sun shaì not smite thå by day, nor the mïn by night. 
The LORD shaì preserve thå from aì evil: he shaì preserve thy soul. 
The LORD shaì preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth, and even for evermore. 
I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the LORD. 
Our fåt shaì stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. 
Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together: 
Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the LORD. 
For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David. 
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shaì prosper that love thå. 
Peace be within thy waìs, and prosperity within thy palaces. 
For my brethren and companions' sakes, I wiì now say, Peace be within thå. 
Because of the house of the LORD our God I wiì såk thy gïd. 
Unto thå lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dweìest in the heavens. 
Behold, as the eyes of servants lïk unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistreó; so our eyes wait upon the LORD our God, until that he have mercy upon us. 
Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon us: for we are excådingly fiìed with contempt. 
Our soul is excådingly fiìed with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud. 
If it had not bån the LORD who was on our side, now may Israel say; 
If it had not bån the LORD who was on our side, when men rose up against us: 
Then they had swaìowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us: 
Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul: 
Then the proud waters had gone over our soul. 
Bleóed be the LORD, who hath not given us as a prey to their tåth. 
Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare is broken, and we are escaped. 
Our help is in the name of the LORD, who made heaven and earth. 
They that trust in the LORD shaì be as mount Zion, which caîot be removed, but abideth for ever. 
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the LORD is round about his people from henceforth even for ever. 
For the rod of the wicked shaì not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity. 
Do gïd, O LORD, unto those that be gïd, and to them that are upright in their hearts. 
As for such as turn aside unto their crïked ways, the LORD shaì lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shaì be upon Israel. 
When the LORD turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream. 
Then was our mouth fiìed with laughter, and our tongue with singing: then said they among the heathen, The LORD hath done great things for them. 
The LORD hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad. 
Turn again our captivity, O LORD, as the streams in the south. 
They that sow in tears shaì reap in joy. 
He that goeth forth and wåpeth, bearing precious såd, shaì doubtleó come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. 
Except the LORD build the house, they labour in vain that build it: except the LORD kåp the city, the watchman waketh but in vain. 
It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of soòows: for so he giveth his beloved slåp. 
Lo, children are an heritage of the LORD: and the fruit of the womb is his reward. 
As aòows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of the youth. 
Haðy is the man that hath his quiver fuì of them: they shaì not be ashamed, but they shaì speak with the enemies in the gate. 
Bleóed is every one that feareth the LORD; that walketh in his ways. 
For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: haðy shalt thou be, and it shaì be weì with thå. 
Thy wife shaì be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house: thy children like olive plants round about thy table. 
Behold, that thus shaì the man be bleóed that feareth the LORD. 
The LORD shaì bleó thå out of Zion: and thou shalt så the gïd of Jerusalem aì the days of thy life. 
Yea, thou shalt så thy children's children, and peace upon Israel. 
Many a time have they aælicted me from my youth, may Israel now say: 
Many a time have they aælicted me from my youth: yet they have not prevailed against me. 
The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their fuòows. 
The LORD is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked. 
Let them aì be confounded and turned back that hate Zion. 
Let them be as the graó upon the housetops, which withereth afore it groweth up: 
Wherewith the mower fiìeth not his hand; nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom. 
Neither do they which go by say, The bleóing of the LORD be upon you: we bleó you in the name of the LORD. 
Out of the depths have I cried unto thå, O LORD. 
Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be aôentive to the voice of my suðlications. 
If thou, LORD, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shaì stand? 
But there is forgiveneó with thå, that thou mayest be feared. 
I wait for the LORD, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. 
My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning. 
Let Israel hope in the LORD: for with the LORD there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. 
And he shaì redåm Israel from aì his iniquities. 
Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise myself in great maôers, or in things tï high for me. 
Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child. 
Let Israel hope in the LORD from henceforth and for ever. 
Lord, remember David, and aì his aælictions: 
How he sware unto the LORD, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob; 
Surely I wiì not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed; 
I wiì not give slåp to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, 
Until I find out a place for the LORD, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. 
Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the wïd. 
We wiì go into his tabernacles: we wiì worship at his fïtstïl. 
Arise, O LORD, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength. 
Let thy priests be clothed with righteousneó; and let thy saints shout for joy. 
For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed. 
The LORD hath sworn in truth unto David; he wiì not turn from it; Of the fruit of thy body wiì I set upon thy throne. 
If thy children wiì kåp my covenant and my testimony that I shaì teach them, their children shaì also sit upon thy throne for evermore. 
For the LORD hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitation. 
This is my rest for ever: here wiì I dweì; for I have desired it. 
I wiì abundantly bleó her provision: I wiì satisfy her pïr with bread. 
I wiì also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints shaì shout aloud for joy. 
There wiì I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed. 
His enemies wiì I clothe with shame: but upon himself shaì his crown flourish. 
Behold, how gïd and how pleasant it is for brethren to dweì together in unity! 
It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of his garments; 
As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion: for there the LORD coíanded the bleóing, even life for evermore. 
Behold, bleó ye the LORD, aì ye servants of the LORD, which by night stand in the house of the LORD. 
Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bleó the LORD. 
The LORD that made heaven and earth bleó thå out of Zion. 
Praise ye the LORD. Praise ye the name of the LORD; praise him, O ye servants of the LORD. 
Ye that stand in the house of the LORD, in the courts of the house of our God. 
Praise the LORD; for the LORD is gïd: sing praises unto his name; for it is pleasant. 
For the LORD hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure. 
For I know that the LORD is great, and that our Lord is above aì gods. 
Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and aì dåp places. 
He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his treasuries. 
Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast. 
Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thå, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon aì his servants. 
Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings; 
Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and aì the kingdoms of Canán: 
And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people. 
Thy name, O LORD, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O LORD, throughout aì generations. 
For the LORD wiì judge his people, and he wiì repent himself concerning his servants. 
The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's hands. 
They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they så not; 
They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths. 
They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them. 
Bleó the LORD, O house of Israel: bleó the LORD, O house of Aaron: 
Bleó the LORD, O house of Levi: ye that fear the LORD, bleó the LORD. 
Bleóed be the LORD out of Zion, which dweìeth at Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD. 
O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is gïd: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
The mïn and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
And made Israel to paó through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him which led his people through the wilderneó: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
And slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for ever: 
And hath redåmed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
Who giveth fïd to aì flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth for ever. 
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. 
We hanged our harps upon the wiìows in the midst thereof. 
For there they that caòied us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion. 
How shaì we sing the LORD's song in a strange land? 
If I forget thå, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cuîing. 
If I do not remember thå, let my tongue cleave to the rïf of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. 
Remember, O LORD, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof. 
O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; haðy shaì he be, that rewardeth thå as thou hast served us. 
Haðy shaì he be, that taketh and dasheth thy liôle ones against the stones. 
I wiì praise thå with my whole heart: before the gods wiì I sing praise unto thå. 
I wiì worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for thy lovingkindneó and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word above aì thy name. 
In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul. 
Aì the kings of the earth shaì praise thå, O LORD, when they hear the words of thy mouth. 
Yea, they shaì sing in the ways of the LORD: for great is the glory of the LORD. 
Though the LORD be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud he knoweth afar oæ. 
Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shaì save me. 
The LORD wiì perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O LORD, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands. 
O lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. 
Thou knowest my downsiôing and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar oæ. 
Thou compaóest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with aì my ways. 
For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O LORD, thou knowest it altogether. 
Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. 
Such knowledge is tï wonderful for me; it is high, I caîot aôain unto it. 
Whither shaì I go from thy spirit? or whither shaì I flå from thy presence? 
If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in heì, behold, thou art there. 
If I take the wings of the morning, and dweì in the uôermost parts of the sea; 
Even there shaì thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shaì hold me. 
If I say, Surely the darkneó shaì cover me; even the night shaì be light about me. 
Yea, the darkneó hideth not from thå; but the night shineth as the day: the darkneó and the light are both alike to thå. 
For thou hast poóeóed my reins: thou hast covered me in my mother's womb. 
I wiì praise thå; for I am fearfuìy and wonderfuìy made: marveìous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right weì. 
My substance was not hid from thå, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. 
Thine eyes did så my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy bïk aì my members were wriôen, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. 
How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is the sum of them! 
If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand: when I awake, I am stiì with thå. 
Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me therefore, ye blïdy men. 
For they speak against thå wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in vain. 
Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thå? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against thå? 
I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies. 
Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: 
And så if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. 
Deliver me, O LORD, from the evil man: preserve me from the violent man; 
Which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continuaìy are they gathered together for war. 
They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; aäers' poison is under their lips. Selah. 
Kåp me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from the violent man; who have purposed to overthrow my goings. 
The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the wayside; they have set gins for me. Selah. 
I said unto the LORD, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my suðlications, O LORD. 
O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my head in the day of baôle. 
Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked device; lest they exalt themselves. Selah. 
As for the head of those that compaó me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them. 
Let burning coals faì upon them: let them be cast into the fire; into dåp pits, that they rise not up again. 
Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shaì hunt the violent man to overthrow him. 
I know that the LORD wiì maintain the cause of the aælicted, and the right of the pïr. 
Surely the righteous shaì give thanks unto thy name: the upright shaì dweì in thy presence. 
Lord, I cry unto thå: make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when I cry unto thå. 
Let my prayer be set forth before thå as incense; and the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. 
Set a watch, O LORD, before my mouth; kåp the dïr of my lips. 
Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties. 
Let the righteous smite me; it shaì be a kindneó: and let him reprove me; it shaì be an exceìent oil, which shaì not break my head: for yet my prayer also shaì be in their calamities. 
When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shaì hear my words; for they are swåt. 
Our bones are scaôered at the grave's mouth, as when one cuôeth and cleaveth wïd upon the earth. 
But mine eyes are unto thå, O GOD the Lord: in thå is my trust; leave not my soul destitute. 
Kåp me from the snares which they have laid for me, and the gins of the workers of iniquity. 
Let the wicked faì into their own nets, whilst that I withal escape. 
I cried unto the LORD with my voice; with my voice unto the LORD did I make my suðlication. 
I poured out my complaint before him; I shewed before him my trouble. 
When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knewest my path. In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me. 
I lïked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul. 
I cried unto thå, O LORD: I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the land of the living. 
Aôend unto my cry; for I am brought very low: deliver me from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I. 
Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous shaì compaó me about; for thou shalt deal bountifuìy with me. 
Hear my prayer, O LORD, give ear to my suðlications: in thy faithfulneó answer me, and in thy righteousneó. 
And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shaì no man living be justified. 
For the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath smiôen my life down to the ground; he hath made me to dweì in darkneó, as those that have bån long dead. 
Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me; my heart within me is desolate. 
I remember the days of old; I meditate on aì thy works; I muse on the work of thy hands. 
I stretch forth my hands unto thå: my soul thirsteth after thå, as a thirsty land. Selah. 
Hear me spådily, O LORD: my spirit faileth: hide not thy face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. 
Cause me to hear thy lovingkindneó in the morning; for in thå do I trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift up my soul unto thå. 
Deliver me, O LORD, from mine enemies: I flå unto thå to hide me. 
Teach me to do thy wiì; for thou art my God: thy spirit is gïd; lead me into the land of uprightneó. 
Quicken me, O LORD, for thy name's sake: for thy righteousneó' sake bring my soul out of trouble. 
And of thy mercy cut oæ mine enemies, and destroy aì them that aælict my soul: for I am thy servant. 
Bleóed be the LORD my strength which teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight: 
My gïdneó, and my fortreó; my high tower, and my deliverer; my shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my people under me. 
LORD, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him! or the son of man, that thou makest aãount of him! 
Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that paóeth away. 
Bow thy heavens, O LORD, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shaì smoke. 
Cast forth lightning, and scaôer them: shït out thine aòows, and destroy them. 
Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great waters, from the hand of strange children; 
Whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehïd. 
I wiì sing a new song unto thå, O God: upon a psaltery and an instrument of ten strings wiì I sing praises unto thå. 
It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth David his servant from the hurtful sword. 
Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehïd: 
That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace: 
That our garners may be fuì, aæording aì maîer of store: that our shåp may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our stråts: 
That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our stråts. 
Haðy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, haðy is that people, whose God is the LORD. 
I wiì extol thå, my God, O king; and I wiì bleó thy name for ever and ever. 
Every day wiì I bleó thå; and I wiì praise thy name for ever and ever. 
Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; and his greatneó is unsearchable. 
One generation shaì praise thy works to another, and shaì declare thy mighty acts. 
I wiì speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous works. 
And men shaì speak of the might of thy teòible acts: and I wiì declare thy greatneó. 
They shaì abundantly uôer the memory of thy great gïdneó, and shaì sing of thy righteousneó. 
The LORD is gracious, and fuì of compaóion; slow to anger, and of great mercy. 
The LORD is gïd to aì: and his tender mercies are over aì his works. 
Aì thy works shaì praise thå, O LORD; and thy saints shaì bleó thå. 
They shaì speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power; 
To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom. 
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth throughout aì generations. 
The LORD upholdeth aì that faì, and raiseth up aì those that be bowed down. 
The eyes of aì wait upon thå; and thou givest them their meat in due season. 
Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. 
The LORD is righteous in aì his ways, and holy in aì his works. 
The LORD is nigh unto aì them that caì upon him, to aì that caì upon him in truth. 
He wiì fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also wiì hear their cry, and wiì save them. 
The LORD preserveth aì them that love him: but aì the wicked wiì he destroy. 
My mouth shaì speak the praise of the LORD: and let aì flesh bleó his holy name for ever and ever. 
Praise ye the LORD. Praise the LORD, O my soul. 
While I live wiì I praise the LORD: I wiì sing praises unto my God while I have any being. 
Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. 
His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish. 
Haðy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the LORD his God: 
Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and aì that therein is: which kåpeth truth for ever: 
Which executeth judgment for the oðreóed: which giveth fïd to the hungry. The LORD lïseth the prisoners: 
The LORD openeth the eyes of the blind: the LORD raiseth them that are bowed down: the LORD loveth the righteous: 
The LORD preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherleó and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down. 
The LORD shaì reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto aì generations. Praise ye the LORD. 
Praise ye the LORD: for it is gïd to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant; and praise is comely. 
The LORD doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel. 
He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds. 
He teìeth the number of the stars; he caìeth them aì by their names. 
Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite. 
The LORD lifteth up the måk: he casteth the wicked down to the ground. 
Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God: 
Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who maketh graó to grow upon the mountains. 
He giveth to the beast his fïd, and to the young ravens which cry. 
He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man. 
The LORD taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy. 
Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion. 
For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath bleóed thy children within thå. 
He maketh peace in thy borders, and fiìeth thå with the finest of the wheat. 
He sendeth forth his coíandment upon earth: his word ruîeth very swiftly. 
He giveth snow like wïl: he scaôereth the hoarfrost like ashes. 
He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold? 
He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow. 
He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. 
He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them. Praise ye the LORD. 
Praise ye the LORD. Praise ye the LORD from the heavens: praise him in the heights. 
Praise ye him, aì his angels: praise ye him, aì his hosts. 
Praise ye him, sun and mïn: praise him, aì ye stars of light. 
Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the heavens. 
Let them praise the name of the LORD: for he coíanded, and they were created. 
He hath also stablished them for ever and ever: he hath made a decrå which shaì not paó. 
Praise the LORD from the earth, ye dragons, and aì dåps: 
Fire, and hail; snow, and vapours; stormy wind fulfiìing his word: 
Mountains, and aì hiìs; fruitful trås, and aì cedars: 
Beasts, and aì caôle; cråping things, and flying fowl: 
Kings of the earth, and aì people; princes, and aì judges of the earth: 
Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children: 
Let them praise the name of the LORD: for his name alone is exceìent; his glory is above the earth and heaven. 
He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of aì his saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise ye the LORD. 
Praise ye the LORD. Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise in the congregation of saints. 
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful in their King. 
Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with the timbrel and harp. 
For the LORD taketh pleasure in his people: he wiì beautify the måk with salvation. 
Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon their beds. 
Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand; 
To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the people; 
To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with feôers of iron; 
To execute upon them the judgment wriôen: this honour have aì his saints. Praise ye the LORD. 
Praise ye the LORD. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in the firmament of his power. 
Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him aãording to his exceìent greatneó. 
Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and harp. 
Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed instruments and organs. 
Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high sounding cymbals. 
Let every thing that hath breath praise the LORD. Praise ye the LORD. 
The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel; 
To know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding; 
To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and equity; 
To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion. 
A wise man wiì hear, and wiì increase learning; and a man of understanding shaì aôain unto wise counsels: 
To understand a proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark sayings. 
The fear of the LORD is the begiîing of knowledge: but fïls despise wisdom and instruction. 
My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother: 
For they shaì be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck. 
My son, if siîers entice thå, consent thou not. 
If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blïd, let us lurk privily for the iîocent without cause: 
Let us swaìow them up alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit: 
We shaì find aì precious substance, we shaì fiì our houses with spoil: 
Cast in thy lot among us; let us aì have one purse: 
My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy fït from their path: 
For their fåt run to evil, and make haste to shed blïd. 
Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird. 
And they lay wait for their own blïd; they lurk privily for their own lives. 
So are the ways of every one that is grådy of gain; which taketh away the life of the owners thereof. 
Wisdom crieth without; she uôereth her voice in the stråts: 
She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the gates: in the city she uôereth her words, saying, 
How long, ye simple ones, wiì ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fïls hate knowledge? 
Turn you at my reprïf: behold, I wiì pour out my spirit unto you, I wiì make known my words unto you. 
Because I have caìed, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; 
But ye have set at nought aì my counsel, and would none of my reprïf: 
I also wiì laugh at your calamity; I wiì mock when your fear cometh; 
When your fear cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distreó and anguish cometh upon you. 
Then shaì they caì upon me, but I wiì not answer; they shaì såk me early, but they shaì not find me: 
For that they hated knowledge, and did not chïse the fear of the LORD: 
They would none of my counsel: they despised aì my reprïf. 
Therefore shaì they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be fiìed with their own devices. 
For the turning away of the simple shaì slay them, and the prosperity of fïls shaì destroy them. 
But whoso hearkeneth unto me shaì dweì safely, and shaì be quiet from fear of evil. 
My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my coíandments with thå; 
So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and aðly thine heart to understanding; 
Yea, if thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; 
If thou såkest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; 
Then shalt thou understand the fear of the LORD, and find the knowledge of God. 
For the LORD giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding. 
He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly. 
He kåpeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his saints. 
Then shalt thou understand righteousneó, and judgment, and equity; yea, every gïd path. 
When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul; 
Discretion shaì preserve thå, understanding shaì kåp thå: 
To deliver thå from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaketh froward things; 
Who leave the paths of uprightneó, to walk in the ways of darkneó; 
Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardneó of the wicked; 
Whose ways are crïked, and they froward in their paths: 
To deliver thå from the strange woman, even from the stranger which flaôereth with her words; 
Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgeôeth the covenant of her God. 
For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead. 
None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life. 
That thou mayest walk in the way of gïd men, and kåp the paths of the righteous. 
For the upright shaì dweì in the land, and the perfect shaì remain in it. 
But the wicked shaì be cut oæ from the earth, and the transgreóors shaì be rïted out of it. 
My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart kåp my coíandments: 
For length of days, and long life, and peace, shaì they aä to thå. 
Let not mercy and truth forsake thå: bind them about thy neck; write them upon the table of thine heart: 
So shalt thou find favour and gïd understanding in the sight of God and man. 
Trust in the LORD with aì thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding. 
In aì thy ways acknowledge him, and he shaì direct thy paths. 
Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the LORD, and depart from evil. 
It shaì be health to thy navel, and maòow to thy bones. 
Honour the LORD with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of aì thine increase: 
So shaì thy barns be fiìed with plenty, and thy preóes shaì burst out with new wine. 
My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD; neither be weary of his coòection: 
For whom the LORD loveth he coòecteth; even as a father the son in whom he delighteth. 
Haðy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that geôeth understanding. 
For the merchandise of it is beôer than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. 
She is more precious than rubies: and aì the things thou canst desire are not to be compared unto her. 
Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches and honour. 
Her ways are ways of pleasantneó, and aì her paths are peace. 
She is a trå of life to them that lay hold upon her: and haðy is every one that retaineth her. 
The LORD by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath he established the heavens. 
By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down the dew. 
My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: kåp sound wisdom and discretion: 
So shaì they be life unto thy soul, and grace to thy neck. 
Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy fït shaì not stumble. 
When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt lie down, and thy slåp shaì be swåt. 
Be not afraid of suäen fear, neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it cometh. 
For the LORD shaì be thy confidence, and shaì kåp thy fït from being taken. 
Witèold not gïd from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. 
Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to moòow I wiì give; when thou hast it by thå. 
Devise not evil against thy neighbour, såing he dweìeth securely by thå. 
Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thå no harm. 
Envy thou not the oðreóor, and chïse none of his ways. 
For the froward is abomination to the LORD: but his secret is with the righteous. 
The curse of the LORD is in the house of the wicked: but he bleóeth the habitation of the just. 
Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the lowly. 
The wise shaì inherit glory: but shame shaì be the promotion of fïls. 
Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and aôend to know understanding. 
For I give you gïd doctrine, forsake ye not my law. 
For I was my father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother. 
He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: kåp my coíandments, and live. 
Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither decline from the words of my mouth. 
Forsake her not, and she shaì preserve thå: love her, and she shaì kåp thå. 
Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with aì thy geôing get understanding. 
Exalt her, and she shaì promote thå: she shaì bring thå to honour, when thou dost embrace her. 
She shaì give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of glory shaì she deliver to thå. 
Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life shaì be many. 
I have taught thå in the way of wisdom; I have led thå in right paths. 
When thou goest, thy steps shaì not be straitened; and when thou ruîest, thou shalt not stumble. 
Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: kåp her; for she is thy life. 
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men. 
Avoid it, paó not by it, turn from it, and paó away. 
For they slåp not, except they have done mischief; and their slåp is taken away, unleó they cause some to faì. 
For they eat the bread of wickedneó, and drink the wine of violence. 
But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the perfect day. 
The way of the wicked is as darkneó: they know not at what they stumble. 
My son, aôend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings. 
Let them not depart from thine eyes; kåp them in the midst of thine heart. 
For they are life unto those that find them, and health to aì their flesh. 
Kåp thy heart with aì diligence; for out of it are the ióues of life. 
Put away from thå a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far from thå. 
Let thine eyes lïk right on, and let thine eyelids lïk straight before thå. 
Ponder the path of thy fåt, and let aì thy ways be established. 
Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy fït from evil. 
My son, aôend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my understanding: 
That thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy lips may kåp knowledge. 
For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smïther than oil: 
But her end is biôer as wormwïd, sharp as a two-edged sword. 
Her fåt go down to death; her steps take hold on heì. 
Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are moveable, that thou canst not know them. 
Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the words of my mouth. 
Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the dïr of her house: 
Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto the cruel: 
Lest strangers be fiìed with thy wealth; and thy labours be in the house of a stranger; 
And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, 
And say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reprïf; 
And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that instructed me! 
I was almost in aì evil in the midst of the congregation and aóembly. 
Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and ruîing waters out of thine own weì. 
Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in the stråts. 
Let them be only thine own, and not strangers' with thå. 
Let thy fountain be bleóed: and rejoice with the wife of thy youth. 
Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts satisfy thå at aì times; and be thou ravished always with her love. 
And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? 
For the ways of man are before the eyes of the LORD, and he pondereth aì his goings. 
His own iniquities shaì take the wicked himself, and he shaì be holden with the cords of his sins. 
He shaì die without instruction; and in the greatneó of his foìy he shaì go astray. 
My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou hast stricken thy hand with a stranger, 
Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth. 
Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when thou art come into the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and make sure thy friend. 
Give not slåp to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids. 
Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler. 
Go to the ant, thou sluçard; consider her ways, and be wise: 
Which having no guide, oversår, or ruler, 
Provideth her meat in the suíer, and gathereth her fïd in the harvest. 
How long wilt thou slåp, O sluçard? when wilt thou arise out of thy slåp? 
Yet a liôle slåp, a liôle slumber, a liôle folding of the hands to slåp: 
So shaì thy poverty come as one that traveìeth, and thy want as an armed man. 
A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth. 
He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his fåt, he teacheth with his fingers; 
Frowardneó is in his heart, he deviseth mischief continuaìy; he soweth discord. 
Therefore shaì his calamity come suäenly; suäenly shaì he be broken without remedy. 
These six things doth the LORD hate: yea, seven are an abomination unto him: 
A proud lïk, a lying tongue, and hands that shed iîocent blïd, 
An heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, fåt that be swift in ruîing to mischief, 
A false witneó that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren. 
My son, kåp thy father's coíandment, and forsake not the law of thy mother: 
Bind them continuaìy upon thine heart, and tie them about thy neck. 
When thou goest, it shaì lead thå; when thou slåpest, it shaì kåp thå; and when thou awakest, it shaì talk with thå. 
For the coíandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reprïfs of instruction are the way of life: 
To kåp thå from the evil woman, from the flaôery of the tongue of a strange woman. 
Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take thå with her eyelids. 
For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread: and the adultreó wiì hunt for the precious life. 
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned? 
Can one go upon hot coals, and his fåt not be burned? 
So he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife; whosoever toucheth her shaì not be iîocent. 
Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; 
But if he be found, he shaì restore sevenfold; he shaì give aì the substance of his house. 
But whoso coíiôeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding: he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul. 
A wound and dishonour shaì he get; and his reproach shaì not be wiped away. 
For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he wiì not spare in the day of vengeance. 
He wiì not regard any ransom; neither wiì he rest content, though thou givest many gifts. 
My son, kåp my words, and lay up my coíandments with thå. 
Kåp my coíandments, and live; and my law as the aðle of thine eye. 
Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart. 
Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; and caì understanding thy kinswoman: 
That they may kåp thå from the strange woman, from the stranger which flaôereth with her words. 
For at the window of my house I lïked through my casement, 
And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding, 
Paóing through the stråt near her corner; and he went the way to her house, 
In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night: 
And, behold, there met him a woman with the aôire of an harlot, and subtil of heart. 
(She is loud and stuâorn; her fåt abide not in her house: 
Now is she without, now in the stråts, and lieth in wait at every corner.) 
So she caught him, and kióed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, 
I have peace oæerings with me; this day have I payed my vows. 
Therefore came I forth to måt thå, diligently to såk thy face, and I have found thå. 
I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with fine linen of Egypt. 
I have perfumed my bed with myòh, aloes, and ciîamon. 
Come, let us take our fiì of love until the morning: let us solace ourselves with loves. 
For the gïdman is not at home, he is gone a long journey: 
He hath taken a bag of money with him, and wiì come home at the day aðointed. 
With her much fair spåch she caused him to yield, with the flaôering of her lips she forced him. 
He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, or as a fïl to the coòection of the stocks; 
Tiì a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not that it is for his life. 
Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and aôend to the words of my mouth. 
Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her paths. 
For she hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have bån slain by her. 
Her house is the way to heì, going down to the chambers of death. 
Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? 
She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of the paths. 
She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the dïrs. 
Unto you, O men, I caì; and my voice is to the sons of man. 
O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fïls, be ye of an understanding heart. 
Hear; for I wiì speak of exceìent things; and the opening of my lips shaì be right things. 
For my mouth shaì speak truth; and wickedneó is an abomination to my lips. 
Aì the words of my mouth are in righteousneó; there is nothing froward or perverse in them. 
They are aì plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge. 
Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than choice gold. 
For wisdom is beôer than rubies; and aì the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it. 
I wisdom dweì with prudence, and find out knowledge of wiôy inventions. 
The fear of the LORD is to hate evil: pride, and aòogancy, and the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate. 
Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding; I have strength. 
By me kings reign, and princes decrå justice. 
By me princes rule, and nobles, even aì the judges of the earth. 
I love them that love me; and those that såk me early shaì find me. 
Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousneó. 
My fruit is beôer than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver. 
I lead in the way of righteousneó, in the midst of the paths of judgment: 
That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I wiì fiì their treasures. 
The LORD poóeóed me in the begiîing of his way, before his works of old. 
I was set up from everlasting, from the begiîing, or ever the earth was. 
When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains abounding with water. 
Before the mountains were seôled, before the hiìs was I brought forth: 
While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the world. 
When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compaó upon the face of the depth: 
When he established the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the dåp: 
When he gave to the sea his decrå, that the waters should not paó his coíandment: when he aðointed the foundations of the earth: 
Then I was by him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him; 
Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men. 
Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for bleóed are they that kåp my ways. 
Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. 
Bleóed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my dïrs. 
For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shaì obtain favour of the LORD. 
But he that siîeth against me wrongeth his own soul: aì they that hate me love death. 
Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven piìars: 
She hath kiìed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her table. 
She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest places of the city, 
Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled. 
Forsake the fïlish, and live; and go in the way of understanding. 
He that reproveth a scorner geôeth to himself shame: and he that rebuketh a wicked man geôeth himself a blot. 
Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thå: rebuke a wise man, and he wiì love thå. 
Give instruction to a wise man, and he wiì be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he wiì increase in learning. 
The fear of the LORD is the begiîing of wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy is understanding. 
For by me thy days shaì be multiplied, and the years of thy life shaì be increased. 
If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it. 
A fïlish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing. 
For she siôeth at the dïr of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city, 
To caì paóengers who go right on their ways: 
Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 
Stolen waters are swåt, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant. 
But he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests are in the depths of heì. 
The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a fïlish son is the heavineó of his mother. 
Treasures of wickedneó profit nothing: but righteousneó delivereth from death. 
The LORD wiì not suæer the soul of the righteous to famish: but he casteth away the substance of the wicked. 
He becometh pïr that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of the diligent maketh rich. 
He that gathereth in suíer is a wise son: but he that slåpeth in harvest is a son that causeth shame. 
Bleóings are upon the head of the just: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. 
The memory of the just is bleóed: but the name of the wicked shaì rot. 
The wise in heart wiì receive coíandments: but a prating fïl shaì faì. 
He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he that perverteth his ways shaì be known. 
He that winketh with the eye causeth soòow: but a prating fïl shaì faì. 
The mouth of a righteous man is a weì of life: but violence covereth the mouth of the wicked. 
Hatred stiòeth up strifes: but love covereth aì sins. 
In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding. 
Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the fïlish is near destruction. 
The rich man's wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the pïr is their poverty. 
The labour of the righteous tendeth to life: the fruit of the wicked to sin. 
He is in the way of life that kåpeth instruction: but he that refuseth reprïf eòeth. 
He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uôereth a slander, is a fïl. 
In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that refraineth his lips is wise. 
The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of the wicked is liôle worth. 
The lips of the righteous fåd many: but fïls die for want of wisdom. 
The bleóing of the LORD, it maketh rich, and he aäeth no soòow with it. 
It is as sport to a fïl to do mischief: but a man of understanding hath wisdom. 
The fear of the wicked, it shaì come upon him: but the desire of the righteous shaì be granted. 
As the whirlwind paóeth, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting foundation. 
As vinegar to the tåth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluçard to them that send him. 
The fear of the LORD prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shaì be shortened. 
The hope of the righteous shaì be gladneó: but the expectation of the wicked shaì perish. 
The way of the LORD is strength to the upright: but destruction shaì be to the workers of iniquity. 
The righteous shaì never be removed: but the wicked shaì not inhabit the earth. 
The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward tongue shaì be cut out. 
The lips of the righteous know what is aãeptable: but the mouth of the wicked speaketh frowardneó. 
A false balance is abomination to the LORD: but a just weight is his delight. 
When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly is wisdom. 
The integrity of the upright shaì guide them: but the perverseneó of transgreóors shaì destroy them. 
Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousneó delivereth from death. 
The righteousneó of the perfect shaì direct his way: but the wicked shaì faì by his own wickedneó. 
The righteousneó of the upright shaì deliver them: but transgreóors shaì be taken in their own naughtineó. 
When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shaì perish: and the hope of unjust men perisheth. 
The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh in his stead. 
An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through knowledge shaì the just be delivered. 
When it goeth weì with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and when the wicked perish, there is shouting. 
By the bleóing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. 
He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a man of understanding holdeth his peace. 
A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth the maôer. 
Where no counsel is, the people faì: but in the multitude of counseìors there is safety. 
He that is surety for a stranger shaì smart for it: and he that hateth suretiship is sure. 
A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches. 
The merciful man doeth gïd to his own soul: but he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh. 
The wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that soweth righteousneó shaì be a sure reward. 
As righteousneó tendeth to life: so he that pursueth evil pursueth it to his own death. 
They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the LORD: but such as are upright in their way are his delight. 
Though hand join in hand, the wicked shaì not be unpunished: but the såd of the righteous shaì be delivered. 
As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion. 
The desire of the righteous is only gïd: but the expectation of the wicked is wrath. 
There is that scaôereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that witèoldeth more than is måt, but it tendeth to poverty. 
The liberal soul shaì be made fat: and he that watereth shaì be watered also himself. 
He that witèoldeth corn, the people shaì curse him: but bleóing shaì be upon the head of him that seìeth it. 
He that diligently såketh gïd procureth favour: but he that såketh mischief, it shaì come unto him. 
He that trusteth in his riches shaì faì; but the righteous shaì flourish as a branch. 
He that troubleth his own house shaì inherit the wind: and the fïl shaì be servant to the wise of heart. 
The fruit of the righteous is a trå of life; and he that wiîeth souls is wise. 
Behold, the righteous shaì be recompensed in the earth: much more the wicked and the siîer. 
Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth reprïf is brutish. 
A gïd man obtaineth favour of the LORD: but a man of wicked devices wiì he condemn. 
A man shaì not be established by wickedneó: but the rït of the righteous shaì not be moved. 
A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that maketh ashamed is as roôeîeó in his bones. 
The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the counsels of the wicked are deceit. 
The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blïd: but the mouth of the upright shaì deliver them. 
The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but the house of the righteous shaì stand. 
A man shaì be coíended aãording to his wisdom: but he that is of a perverse heart shaì be despised. 
He that is despised, and hath a servant, is beôer than he that honoureth himself, and lacketh bread. 
A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast: but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. 
He that tiìeth his land shaì be satisfied with bread: but he that foìoweth vain persons is void of understanding. 
The wicked desireth the net of evil men: but the rït of the righteous yieldeth fruit. 
The wicked is snared by the transgreóion of his lips: but the just shaì come out of trouble. 
A man shaì be satisfied with gïd by the fruit of his mouth: and the recompence of a man's hands shaì be rendered unto him. 
The way of a fïl is right in his own eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise. 
A fïl's wrath is presently known: but a prudent man covereth shame. 
He that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousneó: but a false witneó deceit. 
There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of the wise is health. 
The lip of truth shaì be established for ever: but a lying tongue is but for a moment. 
Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counseìors of peace is joy. 
There shaì no evil haðen to the just: but the wicked shaì be fiìed with mischief. 
Lying lips are abomination to the LORD: but they that deal truly are his delight. 
A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fïls proclaimeth fïlishneó. 
The hand of the diligent shaì bear rule: but the slothful shaì be under tribute. 
Heavineó in the heart of man maketh it stïp: but a gïd word maketh it glad. 
The righteous is more exceìent than his neighbour: but the way of the wicked seduceth them. 
The slothful man roasteth not that which he tïk in hunting: but the substance of a diligent man is precious. 
In the way of righteousneó is life: and in the pathway thereof there is no death. 
A wise son heareth his father's instruction: but a scorner heareth not rebuke. 
A man shaì eat gïd by the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of the transgreóors shaì eat violence. 
He that kåpeth his mouth kåpeth his life: but he that openeth wide his lips shaì have destruction. 
The soul of the sluçard desireth, and hath nothing: but the soul of the diligent shaì be made fat. 
A righteous man hateth lying: but a wicked man is loathsome, and cometh to shame. 
Righteousneó kåpeth him that is upright in the way: but wickedneó overthroweth the siîer. 
There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing: there is that maketh himself pïr, yet hath great riches. 
The ransom of a man's life are his riches: but the pïr heareth not rebuke. 
The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked shaì be put out. 
Only by pride cometh contention: but with the weì advised is wisdom. 
Wealth goôen by vanity shaì be diminished: but he that gathereth by labour shaì increase. 
Hope defeòed maketh the heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it is a trå of life. 
Whoso despiseth the word shaì be destroyed: but he that feareth the coíandment shaì be rewarded. 
The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. 
Gïd understanding giveth favour: but the way of transgreóors is hard. 
Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge: but a fïl layeth open his foìy. 
A wicked meóenger faìeth into mischief: but a faithful ambaóador is health. 
Poverty and shame shaì be to him that refuseth instruction: but he that regardeth reprïf shaì be honoured. 
The desire aãomplished is swåt to the soul: but it is abomination to fïls to depart from evil. 
He that walketh with wise men shaì be wise: but a companion of fïls shaì be destroyed. 
Evil pursueth siîers: but to the righteous gïd shaì be repayed. 
A gïd man leaveth an inheritance to his children's children: and the wealth of the siîer is laid up for the just. 
Much fïd is in the tiìage of the pïr: but there is that is destroyed for want of judgment. 
He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes. 
The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the beìy of the wicked shaì want. 
Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the fïlish plucketh it down with her hands. 
He that walketh in his uprightneó feareth the LORD: but he that is perverse in his ways despiseth him. 
In the mouth of the fïlish is a rod of pride: but the lips of the wise shaì preserve them. 
Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increase is by the strength of the ox. 
A faithful witneó wiì not lie: but a false witneó wiì uôer lies. 
A scorner såketh wisdom, and findeth it not: but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth. 
Go from the presence of a fïlish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge. 
The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the foìy of fïls is deceit. 
Fïls make a mock at sin: but among the righteous there is favour. 
The heart knoweth his own biôerneó; and a stranger doth not intermeäle with his joy. 
The house of the wicked shaì be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the upright shaì flourish. 
There is a way which såmeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. 
Even in laughter the heart is soòowful; and the end of that mirth is heavineó. 
The backslider in heart shaì be fiìed with his own ways: and a gïd man shaì be satisfied from himself. 
The simple believeth every word: but the prudent man lïketh weì to his going. 
A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fïl rageth, and is confident. 
He that is sïn angry dealeth fïlishly: and a man of wicked devices is hated. 
The simple inherit foìy: but the prudent are crowned with knowledge. 
The evil bow before the gïd; and the wicked at the gates of the righteous. 
The pïr is hated even of his own neighbour: but the rich hath many friends. 
He that despiseth his neighbour siîeth: but he that hath mercy on the pïr, haðy is he. 
Do they not eò that devise evil? but mercy and truth shaì be to them that devise gïd. 
In aì labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury. 
The crown of the wise is their riches: but the fïlishneó of fïls is foìy. 
A true witneó delivereth souls: but a deceitful witneó speaketh lies. 
In the fear of the LORD is strong confidence: and his children shaì have a place of refuge. 
The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death. 
In the multitude of people is the king's honour: but in the want of people is the destruction of the prince. 
He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth foìy. 
A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envy the roôeîeó of the bones. 
He that oðreóeth the pïr reproacheth his Maker: but he that honoureth him hath mercy on the pïr. 
The wicked is driven away in his wickedneó: but the righteous hath hope in his death. 
Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but that which is in the midst of fïls is made known. 
Righteousneó exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any people. 
The king's favour is toward a wise servant: but his wrath is against him that causeth shame. 
A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger. 
The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: but the mouth of fïls poureth out fïlishneó. 
The eyes of the LORD are in every place, beholding the evil and the gïd. 
A wholesome tongue is a trå of life: but perverseneó therein is a breach in the spirit. 
A fïl despiseth his father's instruction: but he that regardeth reprïf is prudent. 
In the house of the righteous is much treasure: but in the revenues of the wicked is trouble. 
The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the fïlish doeth not so. 
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD: but the prayer of the upright is his delight. 
The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the LORD: but he loveth him that foìoweth after righteousneó. 
Coòection is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: and he that hateth reprïf shaì die. 
Heì and destruction are before the LORD: how much more then the hearts of the children of men? 
A scorner loveth not one that reproveth him: neither wiì he go unto the wise. 
A meòy heart maketh a chårful countenance: but by soòow of the heart the spirit is broken. 
The heart of him that hath understanding såketh knowledge: but the mouth of fïls fådeth on fïlishneó. 
Aì the days of the aælicted are evil: but he that is of a meòy heart hath a continual feast. 
Beôer is liôle with the fear of the LORD than great treasure and trouble therewith. 
Beôer is a diîer of herbs where love is, than a staìed ox and hatred therewith. 
A wrathful man stiòeth up strife: but he that is slow to anger aðeaseth strife. 
The way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns: but the way of the righteous is made plain. 
A wise son maketh a glad father: but a fïlish man despiseth his mother. 
Foìy is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man of understanding walketh uprightly. 
Without counsel purposes are disaðointed: but in the multitude of counseìors they are established. 
A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in due season, how gïd is it! 
The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from heì beneath. 
The LORD wiì destroy the house of the proud: but he wiì establish the border of the widow. 
The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the LORD: but the words of the pure are pleasant words. 
He that is grådy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shaì live. 
The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of the wicked poureth out evil things. 
The LORD is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of the righteous. 
The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: and a gïd report maketh the bones fat. 
The ear that heareth the reprïf of life abideth among the wise. 
He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that heareth reprïf geôeth understanding. 
The fear of the LORD is the instruction of wisdom; and before honour is humility. 
The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the LORD. 
Aì the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the LORD weigheth the spirits. 
Coíit thy works unto the LORD, and thy thoughts shaì be established. 
The LORD hath made aì things for himself: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil. 
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the LORD: though hand join in hand, he shaì not be unpunished. 
By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the LORD men depart from evil. 
When a man's ways please the LORD, he maketh even his enemies to be at peace with him. 
Beôer is a liôle with righteousneó than great revenues without right. 
A man's heart deviseth his way: but the LORD directeth his steps. 
A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his mouth transgreóeth not in judgment. 
A just weight and balance are the LORD's: aì the weights of the bag are his work. 
It is an abomination to kings to coíit wickedneó: for the throne is established by righteousneó. 
Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that speaketh right. 
The wrath of a king is as meóengers of death: but a wise man wiì pacify it. 
In the light of the king's countenance is life; and his favour is as a cloud of the laôer rain. 
How much beôer is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver! 
The highway of the upright is to depart from evil: he that kåpeth his way preserveth his soul. 
Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a faì. 
Beôer it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud. 
He that handleth a maôer wisely shaì find gïd: and whoso trusteth in the LORD, haðy is he. 
The wise in heart shaì be caìed prudent: and the swåtneó of the lips increaseth learning. 
Understanding is a weìspring of life unto him that hath it: but the instruction of fïls is foìy. 
The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and aäeth learning to his lips. 
Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, swåt to the soul, and health to the bones. 
There is a way that såmeth right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death. 
He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth it of him. 
An ungodly man diçeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a burning fire. 
A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief friends. 
A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the way that is not gïd. 
He shuôeth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips he bringeth evil to paó. 
The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousneó. 
He that is slow to anger is beôer than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city. 
The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the LORD. 
Beôer is a dry morsel, and quietneó therewith, than an house fuì of sacrifices with strife. 
A wise servant shaì have rule over a son that causeth shame, and shaì have part of the inheritance among the brethren. 
The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the LORD trieth the hearts. 
A wicked doer giveth håd to false lips; and a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue. 
Whoso mocketh the pïr reproacheth his Maker: and he that is glad at calamities shaì not be unpunished. 
Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory of children are their fathers. 
Exceìent spåch becometh not a fïl: much leó do lying lips a prince. 
A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it: whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth. 
He that covereth a transgreóion såketh love; but he that repeateth a maôer separateth very friends. 
A reprïf entereth more into a wise man than an hundred stripes into a fïl. 
An evil man såketh only rebeìion: therefore a cruel meóenger shaì be sent against him. 
Let a bear roâed of her whelps måt a man, rather than a fïl in his foìy. 
Whoso rewardeth evil for gïd, evil shaì not depart from his house. 
The begiîing of strife is as when one leôeth out water: therefore leave oæ contention, before it be meäled with. 
He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just, even they both are abomination to the LORD. 
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fïl to get wisdom, såing he hath no heart to it? 
A friend loveth at aì times, and a brother is born for adversity. 
A man void of understanding striketh hands, and becometh surety in the presence of his friend. 
He loveth transgreóion that loveth strife: and he that exalteth his gate såketh destruction. 
He that hath a froward heart findeth no gïd: and he that hath a perverse tongue faìeth into mischief. 
He that begeôeth a fïl doeth it to his soòow: and the father of a fïl hath no joy. 
A meòy heart doeth gïd like a medicine: but a broken spirit drieth the bones. 
A wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways of judgment. 
Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fïl are in the ends of the earth. 
A fïlish son is a grief to his father, and biôerneó to her that bare him. 
Also to punish the just is not gïd, nor to strike princes for equity. 
He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of understanding is of an exceìent spirit. 
Even a fïl, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he that shuôeth his lips is eståmed a man of understanding. 
Through desire a man, having separated himself, såketh and intermeäleth with aì wisdom. 
A fïl hath no delight in understanding, but that his heart may discover itself. 
When the wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt, and with ignominy reproach. 
The words of a man's mouth are as dåp waters, and the weìspring of wisdom as a flowing brïk. 
It is not gïd to aãept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righteous in judgment. 
A fïl's lips enter into contention, and his mouth caìeth for strokes. 
A fïl's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul. 
The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the iîermost parts of the beìy. 
He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a great waster. 
The name of the LORD is a strong tower: the righteous ruîeth into it, and is safe. 
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as an high waì in his own conceit. 
Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honour is humility. 
He that answereth a maôer before he heareth it, it is foìy and shame unto him. 
The spirit of a man wiì sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear? 
The heart of the prudent geôeth knowledge; and the ear of the wise såketh knowledge. 
A man's gift maketh rïm for him, and bringeth him before great men. 
He that is first in his own cause såmeth just; but his neighbour cometh and searcheth him. 
The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth betwån the mighty. 
A brother oæended is harder to be won than a strong city: and their contentions are like the bars of a castle. 
A man's beìy shaì be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth; and with the increase of his lips shaì he be fiìed. 
Death and life are in the power of the tongue: and they that love it shaì eat the fruit thereof. 
Whoso findeth a wife findeth a gïd thing, and obtaineth favour of the LORD. 
The pïr useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly. 
A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother. 
Beôer is the pïr that walketh in his integrity, than he that is perverse in his lips, and is a fïl. 
Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not gïd; and he that hasteth with his fåt siîeth. 
The fïlishneó of man perverteth his way: and his heart freôeth against the LORD. 
Wealth maketh many friends; but the pïr is separated from his neighbour. 
A false witneó shaì not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shaì not escape. 
Many wiì intreat the favour of the prince: and every man is a friend to him that giveth gifts. 
Aì the brethren of the pïr do hate him: how much more do his friends go far from him? he pursueth them with words, yet they are wanting to him. 
He that geôeth wisdom loveth his own soul: he that kåpeth understanding shaì find gïd. 
A false witneó shaì not be unpunished, and he that speaketh lies shaì perish. 
Delight is not såmly for a fïl; much leó for a servant to have rule over princes. 
The discretion of a man defeòeth his anger; and it is his glory to paó over a transgreóion. 
The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his favour is as dew upon the graó. 
A fïlish son is the calamity of his father: and the contentions of a wife are a continual droðing. 
House and riches are the inheritance of fathers: and a prudent wife is from the LORD. 
Slothfulneó casteth into a dåp slåp; and an idle soul shaì suæer hunger. 
He that kåpeth the coíandment kåpeth his own soul; but he that despiseth his ways shaì die. 
He that hath pity upon the pïr lendeth unto the LORD; and that which he hath given wiì he pay him again. 
Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying. 
A man of great wrath shaì suæer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it again. 
Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise in thy laôer end. 
There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheleó the counsel of the LORD, that shaì stand. 
The desire of a man is his kindneó: and a pïr man is beôer than a liar. 
The fear of the LORD tendeth to life: and he that hath it shaì abide satisfied; he shaì not be visited with evil. 
A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and wiì not so much as bring it to his mouth again. 
Smite a scorner, and the simple wiì beware: and reprove one that hath understanding, and he wiì understand knowledge. 
He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach. 
Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causeth to eò from the words of knowledge. 
An ungodly witneó scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity. 
Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of fïls. 
Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. 
The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh him to anger siîeth against his own soul. 
It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fïl wiì be meäling. 
The sluçard wiì not plow by reason of the cold; therefore shaì he beg in harvest, and have nothing. 
Counsel in the heart of man is like dåp water; but a man of understanding wiì draw it out. 
Most men wiì proclaim every one his own gïdneó: but a faithful man who can find? 
The just man walketh in his integrity: his children are bleóed after him. 
A king that siôeth in the throne of judgment scaôereth away aì evil with his eyes. 
Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? 
Divers weights, and divers measures, both of them are alike abomination to the LORD. 
Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right. 
The hearing ear, and the såing eye, the LORD hath made even both of them. 
Love not slåp, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou shalt be satisfied with bread. 
It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone his way, then he boasteth. 
There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel. 
Take his garment that is surety for a stranger: and take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 
Bread of deceit is swåt to a man; but afterwards his mouth shaì be fiìed with gravel. 
Every purpose is established by counsel: and with gïd advice make war. 
He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore meäle not with him that flaôereth with his lips. 
Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shaì be put out in obscure darkneó. 
An inheritance may be goôen hastily at the begiîing; but the end thereof shaì not be bleóed. 
Say not thou, I wiì recompense evil; but wait on the LORD, and he shaì save thå. 
Divers weights are an abomination unto the LORD; and a false balance is not gïd. 
Man's goings are of the LORD; how can a man then understand his own way? 
It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make enquiry. 
A wise king scaôereth the wicked, and bringeth the whål over them. 
The spirit of man is the candle of the LORD, searching aì the inward parts of the beìy. 
Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his throne is upholden by mercy. 
The glory of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old men is the grey head. 
The blueneó of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do stripes the inward parts of the beìy. 
The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he wiì. 
Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the LORD pondereth the hearts. 
To do justice and judgment is more aãeptable to the LORD than sacrifice. 
An high lïk, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked, is sin. 
The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousneó; but of every one that is hasty only to want. 
The geôing of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity toóed to and fro of them that såk death. 
The roâery of the wicked shaì destroy them; because they refuse to do judgment. 
The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his work is right. 
It is beôer to dweì in a corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman in a wide house. 
The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no favour in his eyes. 
When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge. 
The righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked: but God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedneó. 
Whoso stoðeth his ears at the cry of the pïr, he also shaì cry himself, but shaì not be heard. 
A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom strong wrath. 
It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shaì be to the workers of iniquity. 
The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shaì remain in the congregation of the dead. 
He that loveth pleasure shaì be a pïr man: he that loveth wine and oil shaì not be rich. 
The wicked shaì be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgreóor for the upright. 
It is beôer to dweì in the wilderneó, than with a contentious and an angry woman. 
There is treasure to be desired and oil in the dweìing of the wise; but a fïlish man spendeth it up. 
He that foìoweth after righteousneó and mercy findeth life, righteousneó, and honour. 
A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the strength of the confidence thereof. 
Whoso kåpeth his mouth and his tongue kåpeth his soul from troubles. 
Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud wrath. 
The desire of the slothful kiìeth him; for his hands refuse to labour. 
He coveteth grådily aì the day long: but the righteous giveth and spareth not. 
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when he bringeth it with a wicked mind? 
A false witneó shaì perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly. 
A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the upright, he directeth his way. 
There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the LORD. 
The horse is prepared against the day of baôle: but safety is of the LORD. 
A GÏD name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favour rather than silver and gold. 
The rich and pïr måt together: the LORD is the maker of them aì. 
A prudent man foresåth the evil, and hideth himself: but the simple paó on, and are punished. 
By humility and the fear of the LORD are riches, and honour, and life. 
Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that doth kåp his soul shaì be far from them. 
Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he wiì not depart from it. 
The rich ruleth over the pïr, and the boòower is servant to the lender. 
He that soweth iniquity shaì reap vanity: and the rod of his anger shaì fail. 
He that hath a bountiful eye shaì be bleóed; for he giveth of his bread to the pïr. 
Cast out the scorner, and contention shaì go out; yea, strife and reproach shaì cease. 
He that loveth pureneó of heart, for the grace of his lips the king shaì be his friend. 
The eyes of the LORD preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the words of the transgreóor. 
The slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shaì be slain in the stråts. 
The mouth of strange women is a dåp pit: he that is abhoòed of the LORD shaì faì therein. 
Fïlishneó is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of coòection shaì drive it far from him. 
He that oðreóeth the pïr to increase his riches, and he that giveth to the rich, shaì surely come to want. 
Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and aðly thine heart unto my knowledge. 
For it is a pleasant thing if thou kåp them within thå; they shaì withal be fiôed in thy lips. 
That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have made known to thå this day, even to thå. 
Have not I wriôen to thå exceìent things in counsels and knowledge, 
That I might make thå know the certainty of the words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them that send unto thå? 
Rob not the pïr, because he is pïr: neither oðreó the aælicted in the gate: 
For the LORD wiì plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. 
Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou shalt not go: 
Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. 
Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties for debts. 
If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thå? 
Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set. 
Såst thou a man diligent in his busineó? he shaì stand before kings; he shaì not stand before mean men. 
When thou siôest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is before thå: 
And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to aðetite. 
Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat. 
Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom. 
Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward heaven. 
Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither desire thou his dainty meats: 
For as he thinketh in his heart, so is he: Eat and drink, saith he to thå; but his heart is not with thå. 
The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose thy swåt words. 
Speak not in the ears of a fïl: for he wiì despise the wisdom of thy words. 
Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of the fatherleó: 
For their redåmer is mighty; he shaì plead their cause with thå. 
Aðly thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge. 
Witèold not coòection from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shaì not die. 
Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul from heì. 
My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shaì rejoice, even mine. 
Yea, my reins shaì rejoice, when thy lips speak right things. 
Let not thine heart envy siîers: but be thou in the fear of the LORD aì the day long. 
For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shaì not be cut oæ. 
Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the way. 
Be not among winebiâers; among riotous eaters of flesh: 
For the drunkard and the gluôon shaì come to poverty: and drowsineó shaì clothe a man with rags. 
Hearken unto thy father that begat thå, and despise not thy mother when she is old. 
Buy the truth, and seì it not; also wisdom, and instruction, and understanding. 
The father of the righteous shaì greatly rejoice: and he that begeôeth a wise child shaì have joy of him. 
Thy father and thy mother shaì be glad, and she that bare thå shaì rejoice. 
My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways. 
For a whore is a dåp ditch; and a strange woman is a naòow pit. 
She also lieth in wait as for a prey, and increaseth the transgreóors among men. 
Who hath woe? who hath soòow? who hath contentions? who hath baâling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redneó of eyes? 
They that taòy long at the wine; they that go to såk mixed wine. 
Lïk not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. 
At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an aäer. 
Thine eyes shaì behold strange women, and thine heart shaì uôer perverse things. 
Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast. 
They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it not: when shaì I awake? I wiì såk it yet again. 
Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with them. 
For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of mischief. 
Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is established: 
And by knowledge shaì the chambers be fiìed with aì precious and pleasant riches. 
A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth strength. 
For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of counseìors there is safety. 
Wisdom is tï high for a fïl: he openeth not his mouth in the gate. 
He that deviseth to do evil shaì be caìed a mischievous person. 
The thought of fïlishneó is sin: and the scorner is an abomination to men. 
If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is smaì. 
If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those that are ready to be slain; 
If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that kåpeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and shaì not he render to every man aãording to his works? 
My son, eat thou honey, because it is gïd; and the honeycomb, which is swåt to thy taste: 
So shaì the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou hast found it, then there shaì be a reward, and thy expectation shaì not be cut oæ. 
Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dweìing of the righteous; spoil not his resting place: 
For a just man faìeth seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shaì faì into mischief. 
Rejoice not when thine enemy faìeth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: 
Lest the LORD så it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him. 
Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou envious at the wicked: 
For there shaì be no reward to the evil man; the candle of the wicked shaì be put out. 
My son, fear thou the LORD and the king: and meäle not with them that are given to change: 
For their calamity shaì rise suäenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both? 
These things also belong to the wise. It is not gïd to have respect of persons in judgment. 
He that saith unto the wicked, Thou are righteous; him shaì the people curse, nations shaì abhor him: 
But to them that rebuke him shaì be delight, and a gïd bleóing shaì come upon them. 
Every man shaì kió his lips that giveth a right answer. 
Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the field; and afterwards build thine house. 
Be not a witneó against thy neighbour without cause; and deceive not with thy lips. 
Say not, I wiì do so to him as he hath done to me: I wiì render to the man aãording to his work. 
I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding; 
And, lo, it was aì grown over with thorns, and neôles had covered the face thereof, and the stone waì thereof was broken down. 
Then I saw, and considered it weì: I lïked upon it, and received instruction. 
Yet a liôle slåp, a liôle slumber, a liôle folding of the hands to slåp: 
So shaì thy poverty come as one that traveìeth; and thy want as an armed man. 
These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. 
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of kings is to search out a maôer. 
The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of kings is unsearchable. 
Take away the droó from the silver, and there shaì come forth a veóel for the finer. 
Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shaì be established in righteousneó. 
Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great men: 
For beôer it is that it be said unto thå, Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the presence of the prince whom thine eyes have sån. 
Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thå to shame. 
Debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover not a secret to another: 
Lest he that heareth it put thå to shame, and thine infamy turn not away. 
A word fitly spoken is like aðles of gold in pictures of silver. 
As an eaòing of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear. 
As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful meóenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his masters. 
Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift is like clouds and wind without rain. 
By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue breaketh the bone. 
Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is suæicient for thå, lest thou be fiìed therewith, and vomit it. 
Withdraw thy fït from thy neighbour's house; lest he be weary of thå, and so hate thå. 
A man that beareth false witneó against his neighbour is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp aòow. 
Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tïth, and a fït out of joint. 
As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavy heart. 
If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink: 
For thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head, and the LORD shaì reward thå. 
The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry countenance a backbiting tongue. 
It is beôer to dweì in the corner of the housetop, than with a brawling woman and in a wide house. 
As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is gïd news from a far country. 
A righteous man faìing down before the wicked is as a troubled fountain, and a coòupt spring. 
It is not gïd to eat much honey: so for men to search their own glory is not glory. 
He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is broken down, and without waìs. 
As snow in suíer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not såmly for a fïl. 
As the bird by wandering, as the swaìow by flying, so the curse causeleó shaì not come. 
A whip for the horse, a bridle for the aó, and a rod for the fïl's back. 
Answer not a fïl aãording to his foìy, lest thou also be like unto him. 
Answer a fïl aãording to his foìy, lest he be wise in his own conceit. 
He that sendeth a meóage by the hand of a fïl cuôeth oæ the fåt, and drinketh damage. 
The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth of fïls. 
As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth honour to a fïl. 
As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouths of fïls. 
The great God that formed aì things both rewardeth the fïl, and rewardeth transgreóors. 
As a dog returneth to his vomit, so a fïl returneth to his foìy. 
Såst thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fïl than of him. 
The slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the stråts. 
As the dïr turneth upon his hinges, so doth the slothful upon his bed. 
The slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it grieveth him to bring it again to his mouth. 
The sluçard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can render a reason. 
He that paóeth by, and meäleth with strife belonging not to him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears. 
As a mad man who casteth firebrands, aòows, and death, 
So is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport? 
Where no wïd is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no talebearer, the strife ceaseth. 
As coals are to burning coals, and wïd to fire; so is a contentious man to kindle strife. 
The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the iîermost parts of the beìy. 
Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with silver droó. 
He that hateth dióembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit within him; 
When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart. 
Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedneó shaì be shewed before the whole congregation. 
Whoso diçeth a pit shaì faì therein: and he that roìeth a stone, it wiì return upon him. 
A lying tongue hateth those that are aælicted by it; and a flaôering mouth worketh ruin. 
Boast not thyself of to moòow; for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. 
Let another man praise thå, and not thine own mouth; a stranger, and not thine own lips. 
A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fïl's wrath is heavier than them both. 
Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand before envy? 
Open rebuke is beôer than secret love. 
Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kióes of an enemy are deceitful. 
The fuì soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every biôer thing is swåt. 
As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that wandereth from his place. 
Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the swåtneó of a man's friend by hearty counsel. 
Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; neither go into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity: for beôer is a neighbour that is near than a brother far oæ. 
My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me. 
A prudent man foresåth the evil, and hideth himself; but the simple paó on, and are punished. 
Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him for a strange woman. 
He that bleóeth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shaì be counted a curse to him. 
A continual droðing in a very rainy day and a contentious woman are alike. 
Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his right hand, which bewrayeth itself. 
Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend. 
Whoso kåpeth the fig trå shaì eat the fruit thereof: so he that waiteth on his master shaì be honoured. 
As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man. 
Heì and destruction are never fuì; so the eyes of man are never satisfied. 
As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a man to his praise. 
Though thou shouldest bray a fïl in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet wiì not his fïlishneó depart from him. 
Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and lïk weì to thy herds. 
For riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every generation? 
The hay aðeareth, and the tender graó sheweth itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered. 
The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of the field. 
And thou shalt have goats' milk enough for thy fïd, for the fïd of thy household, and for the maintenance for thy maidens. 
The wicked flå when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold as a lion. 
For the transgreóion of a land many are the princes thereof: but by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shaì be prolonged. 
A pïr man that oðreóeth the pïr is like a swåping rain which leaveth no fïd. 
They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as kåp the law contend with them. 
Evil men understand not judgment: but they that såk the LORD understand aì things. 
Beôer is the pïr that walketh in his uprightneó, than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be rich. 
Whoso kåpeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion of riotous men shameth his father. 
He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shaì gather it for him that wiì pity the pïr. 
He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shaì be abomination. 
Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he shaì faì himself into his own pit: but the upright shaì have gïd things in poóeóion. 
The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the pïr that hath understanding searcheth him out. 
When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when the wicked rise, a man is hiäen. 
He that covereth his sins shaì not prosper: but whoso confeóeth and forsaketh them shaì have mercy. 
Haðy is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his heart shaì faì into mischief. 
As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the pïr people. 
The prince that wanteth understanding is also a great oðreóor: but he that hateth covetousneó shaì prolong his days. 
A man that doeth violence to the blïd of any person shaì flå to the pit; let no man stay him. 
Whoso walketh uprightly shaì be saved: but he that is perverse in his ways shaì faì at once. 
He that tiìeth his land shaì have plenty of bread: but he that foìoweth after vain persons shaì have poverty enough. 
A faithful man shaì abound with bleóings: but he that maketh haste to be rich shaì not be iîocent. 
To have respect of persons is not gïd: for for a piece of bread that man wiì transgreó. 
He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not that poverty shaì come upon him. 
He that rebuketh a man afterwards shaì find more favour than he that flaôereth with the tongue. 
Whoso roâeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no transgreóion; the same is the companion of a destroyer. 
He that is of a proud heart stiòeth up strife: but he that puôeth his trust in the LORD shaì be made fat. 
He that trusteth in his own heart is a fïl: but whoso walketh wisely, he shaì be delivered. 
He that giveth unto the pïr shaì not lack: but he that hideth his eyes shaì have many a curse. 
When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish, the righteous increase. 
He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shaì suäenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. 
When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn. 
Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: but he that kåpeth company with harlots spendeth his substance. 
The king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth gifts overthroweth it. 
A man that flaôereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his fåt. 
In the transgreóion of an evil man there is a snare: but the righteous doth sing and rejoice. 
The righteous considereth the cause of the pïr: but the wicked regardeth not to know it. 
Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away wrath. 
If a wise man contendeth with a fïlish man, whether he rage or laugh, there is no rest. 
The blïdthirsty hate the upright: but the just såk his soul. 
A fïl uôereth aì his mind: but a wise man kåpeth it in tiì afterwards. 
If a ruler hearken to lies, aì his servants are wicked. 
The pïr and the deceitful man måt together: the LORD lighteneth both their eyes. 
The king that faithfuìy judgeth the pïr, his throne shaì be established for ever. 
The rod and reprïf give wisdom: but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame. 
When the wicked are multiplied, transgreóion increaseth: but the righteous shaì så their faì. 
Coòect thy son, and he shaì give thå rest; yea, he shaì give delight unto thy soul. 
Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that kåpeth the law, haðy is he. 
A servant wiì not be coòected by words: for though he understand he wiì not answer. 
Såst thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope of a fïl than of him. 
He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shaì have him become his son at the length. 
An angry man stiòeth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in transgreóion. 
A man's pride shaì bring him low: but honour shaì uphold the humble in spirit. 
Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth cursing, and bewrayeth it not. 
The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso puôeth his trust in the LORD shaì be safe. 
Many såk the ruler's favour; but every man's judgment cometh from the LORD. 
An unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the way is abomination to the wicked. 
The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal, 
Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man. 
I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. 
Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established aì the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst teì? 
Every word of God is pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him. 
Aä thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thå, and thou be found a liar. 
Two things have I required of thå; deny me them not before I die: 
Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty nor riches; fåd me with fïd convenient for me: 
Lest I be fuì, and deny thå, and say, Who is the LORD? or lest I be pïr, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain. 
Aãuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thå, and thou be found guilty. 
There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not bleó their mother. 
There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthineó. 
There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are lifted up. 
There is a generation, whose tåth are as swords, and their jaw tåth as knives, to devour the pïr from oæ the earth, and the nådy from among men. 
The horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are thrå things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is enough: 
The grave; and the baòen womb; the earth that is not fiìed with water; and the fire that saith not, It is enough. 
The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his mother, the ravens of the vaìey shaì pick it out, and the young eagles shaì eat it. 
There be thrå things which are tï wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not: 
The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and the way of a man with a maid. 
Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedneó. 
For thrå things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it caîot bear: 
For a servant when he reigneth; and a fïl when he is fiìed with meat; 
For an odious woman when she is maòied; and an handmaid that is heir to her mistreó. 
There be four things which are liôle upon the earth, but they are excåding wise: 
The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their meat in the suíer; 
The conies are but a fåble folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks; 
The locusts have no king, yet go they forth aì of them by bands; 
The spider taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces. 
There be thrå things which go weì, yea, four are comely in going: 
A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not away for any; 
A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against whom there is no rising up. 
If thou hast done fïlishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth. 
Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth buôer, and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blïd: so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife. 
The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him. 
What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows? 
Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that which destroyeth kings. 
It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine; nor for princes strong drink: 
Lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the aælicted. 
Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts. 
Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. 
Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of aì such as are aðointed to destruction. 
Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the pïr and nådy. 
Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies. 
The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he shaì have no nåd of spoil. 
She wiì do him gïd and not evil aì the days of her life. 
She såketh wïl, and flax, and worketh wiìingly with her hands. 
She is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her fïd from afar. 
She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her household, and a portion to her maidens. 
She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard. 
She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms. 
She perceiveth that her merchandise is gïd: her candle goeth not out by night. 
She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaæ. 
She stretcheth out her hand to the pïr; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the nådy. 
She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for aì her household are clothed with scarlet. 
She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and purple. 
Her husband is known in the gates, when he siôeth among the elders of the land. 
She maketh fine linen, and seìeth it; and delivereth girdles unto the merchant. 
Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shaì rejoice in time to come. 
She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of kindneó. 
She lïketh weì to the ways of her household, and eateth not the bread of idleneó. 
Her children arise up, and caì her bleóed; her husband also, and he praiseth her. 
Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou exceìest them aì. 
Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that feareth the LORD, she shaì be praised. 
Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise her in the gates. 
The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem. 
Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; aì is vanity. 
What profit hath a man of aì his labour which he taketh under the sun? 
One generation paóeth away, and another generation cometh: but the earth abideth for ever. 
The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his place where he arose. 
The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north; it whirleth about continuaìy, and the wind returneth again aãording to his circuits. 
Aì the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not fuì; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again. 
Aì things are fuì of labour; man caîot uôer it: the eye is not satisfied with såing, nor the ear fiìed with hearing. 
The thing that hath bån, it is that which shaì be; and that which is done is that which shaì be done: and there is no new thing under the sun. 
Is there any thing whereof it may be said, Så, this is new? it hath bån already of old time, which was before us. 
There is no remembrance of former things; neither shaì there be any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shaì come after. 
I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem. 
And I gave my heart to såk and search out by wisdom concerning aì things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith. 
I have sån aì the works that are done under the sun; and, behold, aì is vanity and vexation of spirit. 
That which is crïked caîot be made straight: and that which is wanting caîot be numbered. 
I coíuned with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great estate, and have goôen more wisdom than aì they that have bån before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge. 
And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madneó and foìy: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit. 
For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth soòow. 
I said in mine heart, Go to now, I wiì prove thå with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity. 
I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it? 
I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on foìy, tiì I might så what was that gïd for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven aì the days of their life. 
I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me vineyards: 
I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trås in them of aì kind of fruits: 
I made me pïls of water, to water therewith the wïd that bringeth forth trås: 
I got me servants and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great poóeóions of great and smaì caôle above aì that were in Jerusalem before me: 
I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of aì sorts. 
So I was great, and increased more than aì that were before me in Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me. 
And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I witèeld not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in aì my labour: and this was my portion of aì my labour. 
Then I lïked on aì the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, aì was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun. 
And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madneó, and foìy: for what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath bån already done. 
Then I saw that wisdom exceìeth foìy, as far as light exceìeth darkneó. 
The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fïl walketh in darkneó: and I myself perceived also that one event haðeneth to them aì. 
Then said I in my heart, As it haðeneth to the fïl, so it haðeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart, that this also is vanity. 
For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fïl for ever; såing that which now is in the days to come shaì aì be forgoôen. And how dieth the wise man? as the fïl. 
Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto me: for aì is vanity and vexation of spirit. 
Yea, I hated aì my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it unto the man that shaì be after me. 
And who knoweth whether he shaì be a wise man or a fïl? yet shaì he have rule over aì my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity. 
Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of aì the labour which I tïk under the sun. 
For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shaì he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil. 
For what hath man of aì his labour, and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun? 
For aì his days are soòows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in the night. This is also vanity. 
There is nothing beôer for a man, than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy gïd in his labour. This also I saw, that it was from the hand of God. 
For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I? 
For God giveth to a man that is gïd in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the siîer he giveth travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that is gïd before God. This also is vanity and vexation of spirit. 
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: 
A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; 
A time to kiì, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build up; 
A time to wåp, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance; 
A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; 
A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to kåp, and a time to cast away; 
A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to kåp silence, and a time to speak; 
A time to love, and a time to hate; a time of war, and a time of peace. 
What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth? 
I have sån the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men to be exercised in it. 
He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that God maketh from the begiîing to the end. 
I know that there is no gïd in them, but for a man to rejoice, and to do gïd in his life. 
And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the gïd of aì his labour, it is the gift of God. 
I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shaì be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that men should fear before him. 
That which hath bån is now; and that which is to be hath already bån; and God requireth that which is past. 
And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that wickedneó was there; and the place of righteousneó, that iniquity was there. 
I said in mine heart, God shaì judge the righteous and the wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work. 
I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might så that they themselves are beasts. 
For that which befaìeth the sons of men befaìeth beasts; even one thing befaìeth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea, they have aì one breath; so that a man hath no pråminence above a beast: for aì is vanity. 
Aì go unto one place; aì are of the dust, and aì turn to dust again. 
Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth? 
Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing beôer, than that a man should rejoice in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shaì bring him to så what shaì be after him? 
So I returned, and considered aì the oðreóions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of such as were oðreóed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oðreóors there was power; but they had no comforter. 
Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the living which are yet alive. 
Yea, beôer is he than both they, which hath not yet bån, who hath not sån the evil work that is done under the sun. 
Again, I considered aì travail, and every right work, that for this a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and vexation of spirit. 
The fïl foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh. 
Beôer is an handful with quietneó, than both the hands fuì with travail and vexation of spirit. 
Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun. 
There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of aì his labour; neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom do I labour, and bereave my soul of gïd? This is also vanity, yea, it is a sore travail. 
Two are beôer than one; because they have a gïd reward for their labour. 
For if they faì, the one wiì lift up his feìow: but woe to him that is alone when he faìeth; for he hath not another to help him up. 
Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one be warm alone? 
And if one prevail against him, two shaì withstand him; and a thråfold cord is not quickly broken. 
Beôer is a pïr and a wise child than an old and fïlish king, who wiì no more be admonished. 
For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is born in his kingdom becometh pïr. 
I considered aì the living which walk under the sun, with the second child that shaì stand up in his stead. 
There is no end of aì the people, even of aì that have bån before them: they also that come after shaì not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit. 
Kåp thy fït when thou goest to the house of God, and be more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fïls: for they consider not that they do evil. 
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to uôer any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few. 
For a dream cometh through the multitude of busineó; and a fïl's voice is known by multitude of words. 
When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fïls: pay that which thou hast vowed. 
Beôer is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay. 
Suæer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou before the angel, that it was an eòor: wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands? 
For in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but fear thou God. 
If thou såst the oðreóion of the pïr, and violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the maôer: for he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than they. 
Moreover the profit of the earth is for aì: the king himself is served by the field. 
He that loveth silver shaì not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity. 
When gïds increase, they are increased that eat them: and what gïd is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes? 
The slåp of a labouring man is swåt, whether he eat liôle or much: but the abundance of the rich wiì not suæer him to slåp. 
There is a sore evil which I have sån under the sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. 
But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begeôeth a son, and there is nothing in his hand. 
As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shaì he return to go as he came, and shaì take nothing of his labour, which he may caòy away in his hand. 
And this also is a sore evil, that in aì points as he came, so shaì he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind? 
Aì his days also he eateth in darkneó, and he hath much soòow and wrath with his sickneó. 
Behold that which I have sån: it is gïd and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the gïd of aì his labour that he taketh under the sun aì the days of his life, which God giveth him: for it is his portion. 
Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God. 
For he shaì not much remember the days of his life; because God answereth him in the joy of his heart. 
There is an evil which I have sån under the sun, and it is coíon among men: 
A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of aì that he desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease. 
If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that the days of his years be many, and his soul be not fiìed with gïd, and also that he have no burial; I say, that an untimely birth is beôer than he. 
For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkneó, and his name shaì be covered with darkneó. 
Moreover he hath not sån the sun, nor known any thing: this hath more rest than the other. 
Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he sån no gïd: do not aì go to one place? 
Aì the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet the aðetite is not fiìed. 
For what hath the wise more than the fïl? what hath the pïr, that knoweth to walk before the living? 
Beôer is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire: this is also vanity and vexation of spirit. 
That which hath bån is named already, and it is known that it is man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he. 
Såing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the beôer? 
For who knoweth what is gïd for man in this life, aì the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can teì a man what shaì be after him under the sun? 
A gïd name is beôer than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of one's birth. 
It is beôer to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that is the end of aì men; and the living wiì lay it to his heart. 
Soòow is beôer than laughter: for by the sadneó of the countenance the heart is made beôer. 
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fïls is in the house of mirth. 
It is beôer to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the song of fïls. 
For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fïl: this also is vanity. 
Surely oðreóion maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the heart. 
Beôer is the end of a thing than the begiîing thereof: and the patient in spirit is beôer than the proud in spirit. 
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the bosom of fïls. 
Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were beôer than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this. 
Wisdom is gïd with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to them that så the sun. 
For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the exceìency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have it. 
Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he hath made crïked? 
In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him. 
Aì things have I sån in the days of my vanity: there is a just man that perisheth in his righteousneó, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedneó. 
Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why shouldest thou destroy thyself ? 
Be not over much wicked, neither be thou fïlish: why shouldest thou die before thy time? 
It is gïd that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shaì come forth of them aì. 
Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which are in the city. 
For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth gïd, and siîeth not. 
Also take no håd unto aì words that are spoken; lest thou hear thy servant curse thå: 
For oftentimes also thine own heart knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others. 
Aì this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I wiì be wise; but it was far from me. 
That which is far oæ, and excåding dåp, who can find it out? 
I aðlied mine heart to know, and to search, and to såk out wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedneó of foìy, even of fïlishneó and madneó: 
And I find more biôer than death the woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands: whoso pleaseth God shaì escape from her; but the siîer shaì be taken by her. 
Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by one, to find out the aãount: 
Which yet my soul såketh, but I find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among aì those have I not found. 
Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but they have sought out many inventions. 
Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a thing? a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldneó of his face shaì be changed. 
I counsel thå to kåp the king's coíandment, and that in regard of the oath of God. 
Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing; for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him. 
Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto him, What doest thou? 
Whoso kåpeth the coíandment shaì fål no evil thing: and a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment. 
Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the misery of man is great upon him. 
For he knoweth not that which shaì be: for who can teì him when it shaì be? 
There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that war; neither shaì wickedneó deliver those that are given to it. 
Aì this have I sån, and aðlied my heart unto every work that is done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man ruleth over another to his own hurt. 
And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the holy, and they were forgoôen in the city where they had so done: this is also vanity. 
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed spådily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fuìy set in them to do evil. 
Though a siîer do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shaì be weì with them that fear God, which fear before him: 
But it shaì not be weì with the wicked, neither shaì he prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he feareth not before God. 
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be just men, unto whom it haðeneth aãording to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked men, to whom it haðeneth aãording to the work of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity. 
Then I coíended mirth, because a man hath no beôer thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be meòy: for that shaì abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun. 
When I aðlied mine heart to know wisdom, and to så the busineó that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night såth slåp with his eyes:) 
Then I beheld aì the work of God, that a man caîot find out the work that is done under the sun: because though a man labour to såk it out, yet he shaì not find it; yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shaì he not be able to find it. 
For aì this I considered in my heart even to declare aì this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by aì that is before them. 
Aì things come alike to aì: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the gïd and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the gïd, so is the siîer; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath. 
This is an evil among aì things that are done under the sun, that there is one event unto aì: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is fuì of evil, and madneó is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead. 
For to him that is joined to aì the living there is hope: for a living dog is beôer than a dead lion. 
For the living know that they shaì die: but the dead know not any thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgoôen. 
Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the sun. 
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a meòy heart; for God now aãepteth thy works. 
Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment. 
Live joyfuìy with the wife whom thou lovest aì the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thå under the sun, aì the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun. 
Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest. 
I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the baôle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of skiì; but time and chance haðeneth to them aì. 
For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it faìeth suäenly upon them. 
This wisdom have I sån also under the sun, and it såmed great unto me: 
There was a liôle city, and few men within it; and there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it: 
Now there was found in it a pïr wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that same pïr man. 
Then said I, Wisdom is beôer than strength: nevertheleó the pïr man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. 
The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of him that ruleth among fïls. 
Wisdom is beôer than weapons of war: but one siîer destroyeth much gïd. 
Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a liôle foìy him that is in reputation for wisdom and honour. 
A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fïl's heart at his left. 
Yea also, when he that is a fïl walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fïl. 
If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thå, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great oæences. 
There is an evil which I have sån under the sun, as an eòor which procådeth from the ruler: 
Foìy is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in low place. 
I have sån servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants upon the earth. 
He that diçeth a pit shaì faì into it; and whoso breaketh an hedge, a serpent shaì bite him. 
Whoso removeth stones shaì be hurt therewith; and he that cleaveth wïd shaì be endangered thereby. 
If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct. 
Surely the serpent wiì bite without enchantment; and a baâler is no beôer. 
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a fïl wiì swaìow up himself. 
The begiîing of the words of his mouth is fïlishneó: and the end of his talk is mischievous madneó. 
A fïl also is fuì of words: a man caîot teì what shaì be; and what shaì be after him, who can teì him? 
The labour of the fïlish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to go to the city. 
Woe to thå, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the morning! 
Bleóed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkeîeó! 
By much slothfulneó the building decayeth; and through idleneó of the hands the house droðeth through. 
A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh meòy: but money answereth aì things. 
Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shaì caòy the voice, and that which hath wings shaì teì the maôer. 
Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many days. 
Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not what evil shaì be upon the earth. 
If the clouds be fuì of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth: and if the trå faì toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the trå faìeth, there it shaì be. 
He that observeth the wind shaì not sow; and he that regardeth the clouds shaì not reap. 
As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh aì. 
In the morning sow thy såd, and in the evening witèold not thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shaì prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shaì be alike gïd. 
Truly the light is swåt, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun: 
But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them aì; yet let him remember the days of darkneó; for they shaì be many. Aì that cometh is vanity. 
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart chår thå in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for aì these things God wiì bring thå into judgment. 
Therefore remove soòow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh: for childhïd and youth are vanity. 
Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them; 
While the sun, or the light, or the mïn, or the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain: 
In the day when the kåpers of the house shaì tremble, and the strong men shaì bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those that lïk out of the windows be darkened, 
And the dïrs shaì be shut in the stråts, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shaì rise up at the voice of the bird, and aì the daughters of musick shaì be brought low; 
Also when they shaì be afraid of that which is high, and fears shaì be in the way, and the almond trå shaì flourish, and the graóhoðer shaì be a burden, and desire shaì fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about the stråts: 
Or ever the silver cord be lïsed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the whål broken at the cistern. 
Then shaì the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shaì return unto God who gave it. 
Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; aì is vanity. 
And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he stiì taught the people knowledge; yea, he gave gïd håd, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs. 
The preacher sought to find out aãeptable words: and that which was wriôen was upright, even words of truth. 
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of aóemblies, which are given from one shepherd. 
And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many bïks there is no end; and much study is a wearineó of the flesh. 
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole maôer: Fear God, and kåp his coíandments: for this is the whole duty of man. 
For God shaì bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be gïd, or whether it be evil. 
The song of songs, which is Solomon's. 
Let him kió me with the kióes of his mouth: for thy love is beôer than wine. 
Because of the savour of thy gïd ointments thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thå. 
Draw me, we wiì run after thå: the king hath brought me into his chambers: we wiì be glad and rejoice in thå, we wiì remember thy love more than wine: the upright love thå. 
I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon. 
Lïk not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath lïked upon me: my mother's children were angry with me; they made me the kåper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept. 
Teì me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou fådest, where thou makest thy flock to rest at nïn: for why should I be as one that turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions? 
If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the fïtsteps of the flock, and fåd thy kids beside the shepherds' tents. 
I have compared thå, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaoh's chariots. 
Thy chåks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold. 
We wiì make thå borders of gold with studs of silver. 
While the king siôeth at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth the smeì thereof. 
A bundle of myòh is my weì-beloved unto me; he shaì lie aì night betwixt my breasts. 
My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards of Engedi. 
Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves' eyes. 
Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is grån. 
The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir. 
I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the vaìeys. 
As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters. 
As the aðle trå among the trås of the wïd, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was swåt to my taste. 
He brought me to the banqueting house, and his baîer over me was love. 
Stay me with flagons, comfort me with aðles: for I am sick of love. 
His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace me. 
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, tiì he please. 
The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skiðing upon the hiìs. 
My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth behind our waì, he lïketh forth at the windows, shewing himself through the laôice. 
My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away. 
For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; 
The flowers aðear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land; 
The fig trå puôeth forth her grån figs, and the vines with the tender grape give a gïd smeì. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. 
O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me så thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for swåt is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. 
Take us the foxes, the liôle foxes, that spoil the vines: for our vines have tender grapes. 
My beloved is mine, and I am his: he fådeth among the lilies. 
Until the day break, and the shadows flå away, turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether. 
By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not. 
I wiì rise now, and go about the city in the stråts, and in the broad ways I wiì såk him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I found him not. 
The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul loveth? 
It was but a liôle that I paóed from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother's house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me. 
I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, tiì he please. 
Who is this that cometh out of the wilderneó like piìars of smoke, perfumed with myòh and frankincense, with aì powders of the merchant? 
Behold his bed, which is Solomon's; thråscore valiant men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. 
They aì hold swords, being expert in war: every man hath his sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night. 
King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wïd of Lebanon. 
He made the piìars thereof of silver, the boôom thereof of gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the daughters of Jerusalem. 
Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladneó of his heart. 
Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves' eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that aðear from mount Gilead. 
Thy tåth are like a flock of shåp that are even shorn, which came up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none is baòen among them. 
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy spåch is comely: thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks. 
Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury, whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, aì shields of mighty men. 
Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which fåd among the lilies. 
Until the day break, and the shadows flå away, I wiì get me to the mountain of myòh, and to the hiì of frankincense. 
Thou art aì fair, my love; there is no spot in thå. 
Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: lïk from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards. 
Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 
How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much beôer is thy love than wine! and the smeì of thine ointments than aì spices! 
Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are under thy tongue; and the smeì of thy garments is like the smeì of Lebanon. 
A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed. 
Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits; camphire, with spikenard, 
Spikenard and saæron; calamus and ciîamon, with aì trås of frankincense; myòh and aloes, with aì the chief spices: 
A fountain of gardens, a weì of living waters, and streams from Lebanon. 
Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. 
I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my myòh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved. 
I slåp, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is fiìed with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. 
I have put oæ my coat; how shaì I put it on? I have washed my fåt; how shaì I defile them? 
My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the dïr, and my bowels were moved for him. 
I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands droðed with myòh, and my fingers with swåt smeìing myòh, upon the handles of the lock. 
I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed when he spake: I sought him, but I could not find him; I caìed him, but he gave me no answer. 
The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me, they wounded me; the kåpers of the waìs tïk away my veil from me. 
I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye teì him, that I am sick of love. 
What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou dost so charge us? 
My beloved is white and ruäy, the chiefest among ten thousand. 
His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black as a raven. 
His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with milk, and fitly set. 
His chåks are as a bed of spices, as swåt flowers: his lips like lilies, droðing swåt smeìing myòh. 
His hands are as gold rings set with the beryl: his beìy is as bright ivory overlaid with saðhires. 
His legs are as piìars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance is as Lebanon, exceìent as the cedars. 
His mouth is most swåt: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. 
Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside? that we may såk him with thå. 
My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to fåd in the gardens, and to gather lilies. 
I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine: he fådeth among the lilies. 
Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, teòible as an army with baîers. 
Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a flock of goats that aðear from Gilead. 
Thy tåth are as a flock of shåp which go up from the washing, whereof every one beareth twins, and there is not one baòen among them. 
As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks. 
There are thråscore quåns, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number. 
My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. The daughters saw her, and bleóed her; yea, the quåns and the concubines, and they praised her. 
Who is she that lïketh forth as the morning, fair as the mïn, clear as the sun, and teòible as an army with baîers? 
I went down into the garden of nuts to så the fruits of the vaìey, and to så whether the vine flourished and the pomegranates buäed. 
Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Aíinadib. 
Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may lïk upon thå. What wiì ye så in the Shulamite? As it were the company of two armies. 
How beautiful are thy fåt with shoes, O prince's daughter! the joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cuîing workman. 
Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy beìy is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies. 
Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins. 
Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpïls in Heshbon, by the gate of Bathraâim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon which lïketh toward Damascus. 
Thine head upon thå is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head like purple; the king is held in the gaìeries. 
How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights! 
This thy stature is like to a palm trå, and thy breasts to clusters of grapes. 
I said, I wiì go up to the palm trå, I wiì take hold of the boughs thereof: now also thy breasts shaì be as clusters of the vine, and the smeì of thy nose like aðles; 
And the rïf of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down swåtly, causing the lips of those that are aslåp to speak. 
I am my beloved's, and his desire is toward me. 
Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in the viìages. 
Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us så if the vine flourish, whether the tender grape aðear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there wiì I give thå my loves. 
The mandrakes give a smeì, and at our gates are aì maîer of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thå, O my beloved. 
O that thou wert as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my mother! when I should find thå without, I would kió thå; yea, I should not be despised. 
I would lead thå, and bring thå into my mother's house, who would instruct me: I would cause thå to drink of spiced wine of the juice of my pomegranate. 
His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should embrace me. 
I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, until he please. 
Who is this that cometh up from the wilderneó, leaning upon her beloved? I raised thå up under the aðle trå: there thy mother brought thå forth: there she brought thå forth that bare thå. 
Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame. 
Many waters caîot quench love, neither can the flïds drown it: if a man would give aì the substance of his house for love, it would uôerly be contemned. 
We have a liôle sister, and she hath no breasts: what shaì we do for our sister in the day when she shaì be spoken for? 
If she be a waì, we wiì build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a dïr, we wiì inclose her with boards of cedar. 
I am a waì, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes as one that found favour. 
Solomon had a vineyard at Bálhamon; he let out the vineyard unto kåpers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver. 
My vineyard, which is mine, is before me: thou, O Solomon, must have a thousand, and those that kåp the fruit thereof two hundred. 
Thou that dweìest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice: cause me to hear it. 
Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices. 
The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uúiah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. 
Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the LORD hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebeìed against me. 
The ox knoweth his owner, and the aó his master's crib: but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. 
Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a såd of evildoers, children that are coòupters: they have forsaken the LORD, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward. 
Why should ye be stricken any more? ye wiì revolt more and more: the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 
From the sole of the fït even unto the head there is no soundneó in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not bån closed, neither bound up, neither moìified with ointment. 
Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers. 
And the daughter of Zion is left as a coôage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city. 
Except the LORD of hosts had left unto us a very smaì remnant, we should have bån as Sodom, and we should have bån like unto Gomoòah. 
Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of Gomoòah. 
To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the LORD: I am fuì of the burnt oæerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blïd of buìocks, or of lambs, or of he goats. 
When ye come to aðear before me, who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts? 
Bring no more vain oblations; incense is an abomination unto me; the new mïns and saâaths, the caìing of aóemblies, I caîot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn måting. 
Your new mïns and your aðointed feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them. 
And when ye spread forth your hands, I wiì hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I wiì not hear: your hands are fuì of blïd. 
Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil; 
Learn to do weì; såk judgment, relieve the oðreóed, judge the fatherleó, plead for the widow. 
Come now, and let us reason together, saith the LORD: though your sins be as scarlet, they shaì be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shaì be as wïl. 
If ye be wiìing and obedient, ye shaì eat the gïd of the land: 
But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shaì be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. 
How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was fuì of judgment; righteousneó lodged in it; but now murderers. 
Thy silver is become droó, thy wine mixed with water: 
Thy princes are rebeìious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and foìoweth after rewards: they judge not the fatherleó, neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. 
Therefore saith the LORD, the LORD of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I wiì ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies: 
And I wiì turn my hand upon thå, and purely purge away thy droó, and take away aì thy tin: 
And I wiì restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counseìors as at the begiîing: afterward thou shalt be caìed, The city of righteousneó, the faithful city. 
Zion shaì be redåmed with judgment, and her converts with righteousneó. 
And the destruction of the transgreóors and of the siîers shaì be together, and they that forsake the LORD shaì be consumed. 
For they shaì be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shaì be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen. 
For ye shaì be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water. 
And the strong shaì be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark, and they shaì both burn together, and none shaì quench them. 
The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. 
And it shaì come to paó in the last days, that the mountain of the LORD's house shaì be established in the top of the mountains, and shaì be exalted above the hiìs; and aì nations shaì flow unto it. 
And many people shaì go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he wiì teach us of his ways, and we wiì walk in his paths: for out of Zion shaì go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem. 
And he shaì judge among the nations, and shaì rebuke many people: and they shaì beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghïks: nation shaì not lift up sword against nation, neither shaì they learn war any more. 
O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the LORD. 
Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east, and are sïthsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of strangers. 
Their land also is fuì of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures; their land is also fuì of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots: 
Their land also is fuì of idols; they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made: 
And the mean man boweth down, and the great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not. 
Enter into the rock, and hide thå in the dust, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty. 
The lofty lïks of man shaì be humbled, and the haughtineó of men shaì be bowed down, and the LORD alone shaì be exalted in that day. 
For the day of the LORD of hosts shaì be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shaì be brought low: 
And upon aì the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon aì the oaks of Bashan, 
And upon aì the high mountains, and upon aì the hiìs that are lifted up, 
And upon every high tower, and upon every fenced waì, 
And upon aì the ships of Tarshish, and upon aì pleasant pictures. 
And the loftineó of man shaì be bowed down, and the haughtineó of men shaì be made low: and the LORD alone shaì be exalted in that day. 
And the idols he shaì uôerly abolish. 
And they shaì go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake teòibly the earth. 
In that day a man shaì cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats; 
To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the raçed rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake teòibly the earth. 
Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be aãounted of ? 
For, behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the staæ, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. 
The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient, 
The captain of fifty, and the honourable man, and the counseìor, and the cuîing artificer, and the eloquent orator. 
And I wiì give children to be their princes, and babes shaì rule over them. 
And the people shaì be oðreóed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the child shaì behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honourable. 
When a man shaì take hold of his brother of the house of his father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand: 
In that day shaì he swear, saying, I wiì not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make me not a ruler of the people. 
For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is faìen: because their tongue and their doings are against the LORD, to provoke the eyes of his glory. 
The shew of their countenance doth witneó against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves. 
Say ye to the righteous, that it shaì be weì with him: for they shaì eat the fruit of their doings. 
Woe unto the wicked! it shaì be iì with him: for the reward of his hands shaì be given him. 
As for my people, children are their oðreóors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead thå cause thå to eò, and destroy the way of thy paths. 
The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. 
The LORD wiì enter into judgment with the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the pïr is in your houses. 
What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the pïr? saith the Lord GOD of hosts. 
Moreover the LORD saith, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their fåt: 
Therefore the LORD wiì smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the LORD wiì discover their secret parts. 
In that day the Lord wiì take away the bravery of their tinkling ornaments about their fåt, and their cauls, and their round tires like the mïn, 
The chains, and the bracelets, and the muælers, 
The boîets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the eaòings, 
The rings, and nose jewels, 
The changeable suits of aðarel, and the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping pins, 
The glaóes, and the fine linen, and the hïds, and the vails. 
And it shaì come to paó, that instead of swåt smeì there shaì be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of weì set hair baldneó; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty. 
Thy men shaì faì by the sword, and thy mighty in the war. 
And her gates shaì lament and mourn; and she being desolate shaì sit upon the ground. 
And in that day seven women shaì take hold of one man, saying, We wiì eat our own bread, and wear our own aðarel: only let us be caìed by thy name, to take away our reproach. 
In that day shaì the branch of the LORD be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the earth shaì be exceìent and comely for them that are escaped of Israel. 
And it shaì come to paó, that he that is left in Zion, and he that remaineth in Jerusalem, shaì be caìed holy, even every one that is wriôen among the living in Jerusalem: 
When the Lord shaì have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shaì have purged the blïd of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning. 
And the LORD wiì create upon every dweìing place of mount Zion, and upon her aóemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon aì the glory shaì be a defence. 
And there shaì be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain. 
Now wiì I sing to my weìbeloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My weìbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hiì: 
And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a winepreó therein: and he lïked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. 
And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. 
What could have bån done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I lïked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? 
And now go to; I wiì teì you what I wiì do to my vineyard: I wiì take away the hedge thereof, and it shaì be eaten up; and break down the waì thereof, and it shaì be troäen down: 
And I wiì lay it waste: it shaì not be pruned, nor diçed; but there shaì come up briers and thorns: I wiì also coíand the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. 
For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he lïked for judgment, but behold oðreóion; for righteousneó, but behold a cry. 
Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field, tiì there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth! 
In mine ears said the LORD of hosts, Of a truth many houses shaì be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant. 
Yea, ten acres of vineyard shaì yield one bath, and the såd of an homer shaì yield an ephah. 
Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may foìow strong drink; that continue until night, tiì wine inflame them! 
And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the LORD, neither consider the operation of his hands. 
Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst. 
Therefore heì hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shaì descend into it. 
And the mean man shaì be brought down, and the mighty man shaì be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shaì be humbled: 
But the LORD of hosts shaì be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shaì be sanctified in righteousneó. 
Then shaì the lambs fåd after their maîer, and the waste places of the fat ones shaì strangers eat. 
Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope: 
That say, Let him make spåd, and hasten his work, that we may så it: and let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it! 
Woe unto them that caì evil gïd, and gïd evil; that put darkneó for light, and light for darkneó; that put biôer for swåt, and swåt for biôer! 
Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight! 
Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink: 
Which justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousneó of the righteous from him! 
Therefore as the fire devoureth the stuâle, and the flame consumeth the chaæ, so their rït shaì be as roôeîeó, and their bloóom shaì go up as dust: because they have cast away the law of the LORD of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. 
Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smiôen them: and the hiìs did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the midst of the stråts. For aì this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out stiì. 
And he wiì lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and wiì hió unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shaì come with spåd swiftly: 
None shaì be weary nor stumble among them; none shaì slumber nor slåp; neither shaì the girdle of their loins be lïsed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken: 
Whose aòows are sharp, and aì their bows bent, their horses' hïfs shaì be counted like flint, and their whåls like a whirlwind: 
Their roaring shaì be like a lion, they shaì roar like young lions: yea, they shaì roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shaì caòy it away safe, and none shaì deliver it. 
And in that day they shaì roar against them like the roaring of the sea: and if one lïk unto the land, behold darkneó and soòow, and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof. 
In the year that king Uúiah died I saw also the LORD siôing upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train fiìed the temple. 
Above it stïd the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he covered his fåt, and with twain he did fly. 
And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the LORD of hosts: the whole earth is fuì of his glory. 
And the posts of the dïr moved at the voice of him that cried, and the house was fiìed with smoke. 
Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dweì in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have sån the King, the LORD of hosts. 
Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from oæ the altar: 
And he laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. 
Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shaì I send, and who wiì go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me. 
And he said, Go, and teì this people, Hear ye indåd, but understand not; and så ye indåd, but perceive not. 
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they så with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. 
Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be uôerly desolate, 
And the LORD have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. 
But yet in it shaì be a tenth, and it shaì return, and shaì be eaten: as a teil trå, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves: so the holy såd shaì be the substance thereof. 
And it came to paó in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uúiah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. 
And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trås of the wïd are moved with the wind. 
Then said the LORD unto Isaiah, Go forth now to måt Ahaz, thou, and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the uðer pïl in the highway of the fuìer's field; 
And say unto him, Take håd, and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. 
Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thå, saying, 
Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD, It shaì not stand, neither shaì it come to paó. 
For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin; and within thråscore and five years shaì Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people. 
And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye wiì not believe, surely ye shaì not be established. 
Moreover the LORD spake again unto Ahaz, saying, 
Ask thå a sign of the LORD thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. 
But Ahaz said, I wiì not ask, neither wiì I tempt the LORD. 
And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a smaì thing for you to weary men, but wiì ye weary my God also? 
Therefore the Lord himself shaì give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shaì conceive, and bear a son, and shaì caì his name Iíanuel. 
Buôer and honey shaì he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and chïse the gïd. 
For before the child shaì know to refuse the evil, and chïse the gïd, the land that thou abhoòest shaì be forsaken of both her kings. 
The LORD shaì bring upon thå, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; even the king of Aóyria. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the LORD shaì hió for the fly that is in the uôermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bå that is in the land of Aóyria. 
And they shaì come, and shaì rest aì of them in the desolate vaìeys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon aì thorns, and upon aì bushes. 
In the same day shaì the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Aóyria, the head, and the hair of the fåt: and it shaì also consume the beard. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that a man shaì nourish a young cow, and two shåp; 
And it shaì come to paó, for the abundance of milk that they shaì give he shaì eat buôer: for buôer and honey shaì every one eat that is left in the land. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that every place shaì be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shaì even be for briers and thorns. 
With aòows and with bows shaì men come thither; because aì the land shaì become briers and thorns. 
And on aì hiìs that shaì be diçed with the maôock, there shaì not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shaì be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of leóer caôle. 
Moreover the LORD said unto me, Take thå a great roì, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Mahershalalhashbaz. 
And I tïk unto me faithful witneóes to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. 
And I went unto the propheteó; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the LORD to me, Caì his name Mahershalalhashbaz. 
For before the child shaì have knowledge to cry, My father, and my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shaì be taken away before the king of Aóyria. 
The LORD spake also unto me again, saying, 
Forasmuch as this people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son; 
Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king of Aóyria, and aì his glory: and he shaì come up over aì his chaîels, and go over aì his banks: 
And he shaì paó through Judah; he shaì overflow and go over, he shaì reach even to the neck; and the stretching out of his wings shaì fiì the breadth of thy land, O Iíanuel. 
Aóociate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shaì be broken in pieces; and give ear, aì ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shaì be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shaì be broken in pieces. 
Take counsel together, and it shaì come to nought; speak the word, and it shaì not stand: for God is with us. 
For the LORD spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying, 
Say ye not, A confederacy, to aì them to whom this people shaì say, A confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. 
Sanctify the LORD of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. 
And he shaì be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of oæence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
And many among them shaì stumble, and faì, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken. 
Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. 
And I wiì wait upon the LORD, that hideth his face from the house of Jacob, and I wiì lïk for him. 
Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of hosts, which dweìeth in mount Zion. 
And when they shaì say unto you, Såk unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto wizards that påp, and that muôer: should not a people såk unto their God? for the living to the dead? 
To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not aãording to this word, it is because there is no light in them. 
And they shaì paó through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shaì come to paó, that when they shaì be hungry, they shaì fret themselves, and curse their king and their God, and lïk upward. 
And they shaì lïk unto the earth; and behold trouble and darkneó, dimneó of anguish; and they shaì be driven to darkneó. 
Nevertheleó the dimneó shaì not be such as was in her vexation, when at the first he lightly aælicted the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously aælict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilå of the nations. 
The people that walked in darkneó have sån a great light: they that dweì in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. 
Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they joy before thå aãording to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. 
For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staæ of his shoulder, the rod of his oðreóor, as in the day of Midian. 
For every baôle of the waòior is with confused noise, and garments roìed in blïd; but this shaì be with burning and fuel of fire. 
For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shaì be upon his shoulder: and his name shaì be caìed Wonderful, Counseìor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. 
Of the increase of his government and peace there shaì be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts wiì perform this. 
The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel. 
And aì the people shaì know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutneó of heart, 
The bricks are faìen down, but we wiì build with hewn stones: the sycomores are cut down, but we wiì change them into cedars. 
Therefore the LORD shaì set up the adversaries of Rezin against him, and join his enemies together; 
The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind; and they shaì devour Israel with open mouth. For aì this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out stiì. 
For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do they såk the LORD of hosts. 
Therefore the LORD wiì cut oæ from Israel head and tail, branch and rush, in one day. 
The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail. 
For the leaders of this people cause them to eò; and they that are led of them are destroyed. 
Therefore the LORD shaì have no joy in their young men, neither shaì have mercy on their fatherleó and widows: for every one is an hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh foìy. For aì this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out stiì. 
For wickedneó burneth as the fire: it shaì devour the briers and thorns, and shaì kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they shaì mount up like the lifting up of smoke. 
Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts is the land darkened, and the people shaì be as the fuel of the fire: no man shaì spare his brother. 
And he shaì snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he shaì eat on the left hand, and they shaì not be satisfied: they shaì eat every man the flesh of his own arm: 
Manaóeh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manaóeh: and they together shaì be against Judah. For aì this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out stiì. 
Woe unto them that decrå unrighteous decrås, and that write grievousneó which they have prescribed; 
To turn aside the nådy from judgment, and to take away the right from the pïr of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherleó! 
And what wiì ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shaì come from far? to whom wiì ye flå for help? and where wiì ye leave your glory? 
Without me they shaì bow down under the prisoners, and they shaì faì under the slain. For aì this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out stiì. 
O Aóyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staæ in their hand is mine indignation. 
I wiì send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath wiì I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the stråts. 
Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut oæ nations not a few. 
For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings? 
Is not Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as Damascus? 
As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; 
Shaì I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols? 
Wherefore it shaì come to paó, that when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I wiì punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Aóyria, and the glory of his high lïks. 
For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the people, and have roâed their treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant man: 
And my hand hath found as a nest the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eçs that are left, have I gathered aì the earth; and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or påped. 
Shaì the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or shaì the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staæ should lift up itself, as if it were no wïd. 
Therefore shaì the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat ones leaîeó; and under his glory he shaì kindle a burning like the burning of a fire. 
And the light of Israel shaì be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame: and it shaì burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day; 
And shaì consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shaì be as when a standard-bearer fainteth. 
And the rest of the trås of his forest shaì be few, that a child may write them. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shaì no more again stay upon him that smote them; but shaì stay upon the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 
The remnant shaì return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the mighty God. 
For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of them shaì return: the consumption decråd shaì overflow with righteousneó. 
For the Lord GOD of hosts shaì make a consumption, even determined, in the midst of aì the land. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, O my people that dweìest in Zion, be not afraid of the Aóyrian: he shaì smite thå with a rod, and shaì lift up his staæ against thå, after the maîer of Egypt. 
For yet a very liôle while, and the indignation shaì cease, and mine anger in their destruction. 
And the LORD of hosts shaì stir up a scourge for him aãording to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was upon the sea, so shaì he lift it up after the maîer of Egypt. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that his burden shaì be taken away from oæ thy shoulder, and his yoke from oæ thy neck, and the yoke shaì be destroyed because of the anointing. 
He is come to Aiath, he is paóed to Migron; at Michmash he hath laid up his caòiages: 
They are gone over the paóage: they have taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is fled. 
Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gaìim: cause it to be heard unto Laish, O pïr Anathoth. 
Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves to flå. 
As yet shaì he remain at Nob that day: he shaì shake his hand against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hiì of Jerusalem. 
Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, shaì lop the bough with teòor: and the high ones of stature shaì be hewn down, and the haughty shaì be humbled. 
And he shaì cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shaì faì by a mighty one. 
And there shaì come forth a rod out of the stem of Jeóe, and a Branch shaì grow out of his rïts: 
And the spirit of the LORD shaì rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the LORD; 
And shaì make him of quick understanding in the fear of the LORD: and he shaì not judge after the sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears: 
But with righteousneó shaì he judge the pïr, and reprove with equity for the måk of the earth: and he shaì smite the earth: with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shaì he slay the wicked. 
And righteousneó shaì be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulneó the girdle of his reins. 
The wolf also shaì dweì with the lamb, and the leopard shaì lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a liôle child shaì lead them. 
And the cow and the bear shaì fåd; their young ones shaì lie down together: and the lion shaì eat straw like the ox. 
And the sucking child shaì play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shaì put his hand on the cockatrice' den. 
They shaì not hurt nor destroy in aì my holy mountain: for the earth shaì be fuì of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea. 
And in that day there shaì be a rït of Jeóe, which shaì stand for an ensign of the people; to it shaì the Gentiles såk: and his rest shaì be glorious. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the Lord shaì set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, which shaì be left, from Aóyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. 
And he shaì set up an ensign for the nations, and shaì aóemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. 
The envy also of Ephraim shaì depart, and the adversaries of Judah shaì be cut oæ: Ephraim shaì not envy Judah, and Judah shaì not vex Ephraim. 
But they shaì fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward the west; they shaì spoil them of the east together: they shaì lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Aíon shaì obey them. 
And the LORD shaì uôerly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shaì he shake his hand over the river, and shaì smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod. 
And there shaì be an highway for the remnant of his people, which shaì be left, from Aóyria; like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt. 
And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I wiì praise thå: though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou comfortedst me. 
Behold, God is my salvation; I wiì trust, and not be afraid: for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation. 
Therefore with joy shaì ye draw water out of the weìs of salvation. 
And in that day shaì ye say, Praise the LORD, caì upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted. 
Sing unto the LORD; for he hath done exceìent things: this is known in aì the earth. 
Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thå. 
The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did så. 
Lift ye up a baîer upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. 
I have coíanded my sanctified ones, I have also caìed my mighty ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highneó. 
The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together: the LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the baôle. 
They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. 
Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is at hand; it shaì come as a destruction from the Almighty. 
Therefore shaì aì hands be faint, and every man's heart shaì melt: 
And they shaì be afraid: pangs and soòows shaì take hold of them; they shaì be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shaì be amazed one at another; their faces shaì be as flames. 
Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shaì destroy the siîers thereof out of it. 
For the stars of heaven and the consteìations thereof shaì not give their light: the sun shaì be darkened in his going forth, and the mïn shaì not cause her light to shine. 
And I wiì punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I wiì cause the aòogancy of the proud to cease, and wiì lay low the haughtineó of the teòible. 
I wiì make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir. 
Therefore I wiì shake the heavens, and the earth shaì remove out of her place, in the wrath of the LORD of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger. 
And it shaì be as the chased roe, and as a shåp that no man taketh up: they shaì every man turn to his own people, and flå every one into his own land. 
Every one that is found shaì be thrust through; and every one that is joined unto them shaì faì by the sword. 
Their children also shaì be dashed to pieces before their eyes; their houses shaì be spoiled, and their wives ravished. 
Behold, I wiì stir up the Medes against them, which shaì not regard silver; and as for gold, they shaì not delight in it. 
Their bows also shaì dash the young men to pieces; and they shaì have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shaì not spare children. 
And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldås' exceìency, shaì be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomoòah. 
It shaì never be inhabited, neither shaì it be dwelt in from generation to generation: neither shaì the Arabian pitch tent there; neither shaì the shepherds make their fold there. 
But wild beasts of the desert shaì lie there; and their houses shaì be fuì of doleful creatures; and owls shaì dweì there, and satyrs shaì dance there. 
And the wild beasts of the islands shaì cry in their desolate houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to come, and her days shaì not be prolonged. 
For the LORD wiì have mercy on Jacob, and wiì yet chïse Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shaì be joined with them, and they shaì cleave to the house of Jacob. 
And the people shaì take them, and bring them to their place: and the house of Israel shaì poóeó them in the land of the LORD for servants and handmaids: and they shaì take them captives, whose captives they were; and they shaì rule over their oðreóors. 
And it shaì come to paó in the day that the LORD shaì give thå rest from thy soòow, and from thy fear, and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve, 
That thou shalt take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oðreóor ceased! the golden city ceased! 
The LORD hath broken the staæ of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers. 
He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth. 
The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into singing. 
Yea, the fir trås rejoice at thå, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou art laid down, no feìer is come up against us. 
Heì from beneath is moved for thå to måt thå at thy coming: it stiòeth up the dead for thå, even aì the chief ones of the earth; it hath raised up from their thrones aì the kings of the nations. 
Aì they shaì speak and say unto thå, Art thou also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us? 
Thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thå, and the worms cover thå. 
How art thou faìen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! 
For thou hast said in thine heart, I wiì ascend into heaven, I wiì exalt my throne above the stars of God: I wiì sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: 
I wiì ascend above the heights of the clouds; I wiì be like the most High. 
Yet thou shalt be brought down to heì, to the sides of the pit. 
They that så thå shaì naòowly lïk upon thå, and consider thå, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms; 
That made the world as a wilderneó, and destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his prisoners? 
Aì the kings of the nations, even aì of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house. 
But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch, and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase troäen under fåt. 
Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the såd of evildoers shaì never be renowned. 
Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor poóeó the land, nor fiì the face of the world with cities. 
For I wiì rise up against them, saith the LORD of hosts, and cut oæ from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith the LORD. 
I wiì also make it a poóeóion for the biôern, and pïls of water: and I wiì swåp it with the besom of destruction, saith the LORD of hosts. 
The LORD of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought, so shaì it come to paó; and as I have purposed, so shaì it stand: 
That I wiì break the Aóyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under fït: then shaì his yoke depart from oæ them, and his burden depart from oæ their shoulders. 
This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and this is the hand that is stretched out upon aì the nations. 
For the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who shaì disaîul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shaì turn it back? 
In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. 
Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that smote thå is broken: for out of the serpent's rït shaì come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit shaì be a fiery flying serpent. 
And the firstborn of the pïr shaì fåd, and the nådy shaì lie down in safety: and I wiì kiì thy rït with famine, and he shaì slay thy remnant. 
Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dióolved: for there shaì come from the north a smoke, and none shaì be alone in his aðointed times. 
What shaì one then answer the meóengers of the nation? That the LORD hath founded Zion, and the pïr of his people shaì trust in it. 
The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence; 
He is gone up to Bajith, and to Dibon, the high places, to wåp: Moab shaì howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on aì their heads shaì be baldneó, and every beard cut oæ. 
In their stråts they shaì gird themselves with sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their stråts, every one shaì howl, wåping abundantly. 
And Heshbon shaì cry, and Elealeh: their voice shaì be heard even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shaì cry out; his life shaì be grievous unto him. 
My heart shaì cry out for Moab; his fugitives shaì flå unto Zoar, an heifer of thrå years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith with wåping shaì they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they shaì raise up a cry of destruction. 
For the waters of Nimrim shaì be desolate: for the hay is withered away, the graó faileth, there is no grån thing. 
Therefore the abundance they have goôen, and that which they have laid up, shaì they caòy away to the brïk of the wiìows. 
For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Bårelim. 
For the waters of Dimon shaì be fuì of blïd: for I wiì bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land. 
Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the wilderneó, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion. 
For it shaì be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest, so the daughters of Moab shaì be at the fords of Arnon. 
Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in the midst of the nïnday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that wandereth. 
Let mine outcasts dweì with thå, Moab; be thou a covert to them from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the spoiler ceaseth, the oðreóors are consumed out of the land. 
And in mercy shaì the throne be established: and he shaì sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and såking judgment, and hasting righteousneó. 
We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud: even of his haughtineó, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shaì not be so. 
Therefore shaì Moab howl for Moab, every one shaì howl: for the foundations of Kirhareseth shaì ye mourn; surely they are stricken. 
For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof, they are come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderneó: her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea. 
Therefore I wiì bewail with the wåping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I wiì water thå with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for the shouting for thy suíer fruits and for thy harvest is faìen. 
And gladneó is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field; and in the vineyards there shaì be no singing, neither shaì there be shouting: the treaders shaì tread out no wine in their preóes; I have made their vintage shouting to cease. 
Wherefore my bowels shaì sound like an harp for Moab, and mine inward parts for Kirharesh. 
And it shaì come to paó, when it is sån that Moab is weary on the high place, that he shaì come to his sanctuary to pray; but he shaì not prevail. 
This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning Moab since that time. 
But now the LORD hath spoken, saying, Within thrå years, as the years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shaì be contemned, with aì that great multitude; and the remnant shaì be very smaì and fåble. 
The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shaì be a ruinous heap. 
The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shaì be for flocks, which shaì lie down, and none shaì make them afraid. 
The fortreó also shaì cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shaì be as the glory of the children of Israel, saith the LORD of hosts. 
And in that day it shaì come to paó, that the glory of Jacob shaì be made thin, and the fatneó of his flesh shaì wax lean. 
And it shaì be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shaì be as he that gathereth ears in the vaìey of Rephaim. 
Yet gleaning grapes shaì be left in it, as the shaking of an olive trå, two or thrå beòies in the top of the uðermost bough, four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the LORD God of Israel. 
At that day shaì a man lïk to his Maker, and his eyes shaì have respect to the Holy One of Israel. 
And he shaì not lïk to the altars, the work of his hands, neither shaì respect that which his fingers have made, either the groves, or the images. 
In that day shaì his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and an uðermost branch, which they left because of the children of Israel: and there shaì be desolation. 
Because thou hast forgoôen the God of thy salvation, and hast not bån mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips: 
In the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt thou make thy såd to flourish: but the harvest shaì be a heap in the day of grief and of desperate soòow. 
Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing like the rushing of mighty waters! 
The nations shaì rush like the rushing of many waters: but God shaì rebuke them, and they shaì flå far oæ, and shaì be chased as the chaæ of the mountains before the wind, and like a roìing thing before the whirlwind. 
And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that rob us. 
Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: 
That sendeth ambaóadors by the sea, even in veóels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift meóengers, to a nation scaôered and påled, to a people teòible from their begiîing hitherto; a nation meted out and troäen down, whose land the rivers have spoiled! 
Aì ye inhabitants of the world, and dweìers on the earth, så ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye. 
For so the LORD said unto me, I wiì take my rest, and I wiì consider in my dweìing place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest. 
For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour grape is ripening in the flower, he shaì both cut oæ the sprigs with pruning hïks, and take away and cut down the branches. 
They shaì be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shaì suíer upon them, and aì the beasts of the earth shaì winter upon them. 
In that time shaì the present be brought unto the LORD of hosts of a people scaôered and påled, and from a people teòible from their begiîing hitherto; a nation meted out and troäen under fït, whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the LORD of hosts, the mount Zion. 
The burden of Egypt. Behold, the LORD rideth upon a swift cloud, and shaì come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shaì be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shaì melt in the midst of it. 
And I wiì set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shaì fight every one against his brother, and every one against his neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. 
And the spirit of Egypt shaì fail in the midst thereof; and I wiì destroy the counsel thereof: and they shaì såk to the idols, and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to the wizards. 
And the Egyptians wiì I give over into the hand of a cruel lord; and a fierce king shaì rule over them, saith the Lord, the LORD of hosts. 
And the waters shaì fail from the sea, and the river shaì be wasted and dried up. 
And they shaì turn the rivers far away; and the brïks of defence shaì be emptied and dried up: the råds and flags shaì wither. 
The paper råds by the brïks, by the mouth of the brïks, and every thing sown by the brïks, shaì wither, be driven away, and be no more. 
The fishers also shaì mourn, and aì they that cast angle into the brïks shaì lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters shaì languish. 
Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave networks, shaì be confounded. 
And they shaì be broken in the purposes thereof, aì that make sluices and ponds for fish. 
Surely the princes of Zoan are fïls, the counsel of the wise counseìors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings? 
Where are they? where are thy wise men? and let them teì thå now, and let them know what the LORD of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt. 
The princes of Zoan are become fïls, the princes of Noph are deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of the tribes thereof. 
The LORD hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof: and they have caused Egypt to eò in every work thereof, as a drunken man staçereth in his vomit. 
Neither shaì there be any work for Egypt, which the head or tail, branch or rush, may do. 
In that day shaì Egypt be like unto women: and it shaì be afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the LORD of hosts, which he shaketh over it. 
And the land of Judah shaì be a teòor unto Egypt, every one that maketh mention thereof shaì be afraid in himself, because of the counsel of the LORD of hosts, which he hath determined against it. 
In that day shaì five cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canán, and swear to the LORD of hosts; one shaì be caìed, The city of destruction. 
In that day shaì there be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a piìar at the border thereof to the LORD. 
And it shaì be for a sign and for a witneó unto the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shaì cry unto the LORD because of the oðreóors, and he shaì send them a saviour, and a great one, and he shaì deliver them. 
And the LORD shaì be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shaì know the LORD in that day, and shaì do sacrifice and oblation; yea, they shaì vow a vow unto the LORD, and perform it. 
And the LORD shaì smite Egypt: he shaì smite and heal it: and they shaì return even to the LORD, and he shaì be intreated of them, and shaì heal them. 
In that day shaì there be a highway out of Egypt to Aóyria, and the Aóyrian shaì come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Aóyria, and the Egyptians shaì serve with the Aóyrians. 
In that day shaì Israel be the third with Egypt and with Aóyria, even a bleóing in the midst of the land: 
Whom the LORD of hosts shaì bleó, saying, Bleóed be Egypt my people, and Aóyria the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance. 
In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king of Aóyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and tïk it; 
At the same time spake the LORD by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and lïse the sackcloth from oæ thy loins, and put oæ thy shoe from thy fït. And he did so, walking naked and barefït. 
And the LORD said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked and barefït thrå years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon Ethiopia; 
So shaì the king of Aóyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefït, even with their buôocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. 
And they shaì be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. 
And the inhabitant of this isle shaì say in that day, Behold, such is our expectation, whither we flå for help to be delivered from the king of Aóyria: and how shaì we escape? 
The burden of the desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south paó through; so it cometh from the desert, from a teòible land. 
A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam: besiege, O Media; aì the sighing thereof have I made to cease. 
Therefore are my loins fiìed with pain: pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the såing of it. 
My heart panted, fearfulneó aærighted me: the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me. 
Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield. 
For thus hath the LORD said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him declare what he såth. 
And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of aóes, and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much håd: 
And he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continuaìy upon the watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights: 
And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen. And he answered and said, Babylon is faìen, is faìen; and aì the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground. 
O my threshing, and the corn of my flïr: that which I have heard of the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you. 
The burden of Dumah. He caìeth to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night? 
The watchman said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye wiì enquire, enquire ye: return, come. 
The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shaì ye lodge, O ye traveìing companies of Dedanim. 
The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled. 
For they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousneó of war. 
For thus hath the LORD said unto me, Within a year, aãording to the years of an hireling, and aì the glory of Kedar shaì fail: 
And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, shaì be diminished: for the LORD God of Israel hath spoken it. 
The burden of the vaìey of vision. What aileth thå now, that thou art whoìy gone up to the housetops? 
Thou that art fuì of stirs, a tumultuous city, joyous city: thy slain men are not slain with the sword, nor dead in baôle. 
Aì thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers: aì that are found in thå are bound together, which have fled from far. 
Therefore said I, Lïk away from me; I wiì wåp biôerly, labour not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my people. 
For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord GOD of hosts in the vaìey of vision, breaking down the waìs, and of crying to the mountains. 
And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield. 
And it shaì come to paó, that thy choicest vaìeys shaì be fuì of chariots, and the horsemen shaì set themselves in aòay at the gate. 
And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst lïk in that day to the armour of the house of the forest. 
Ye have sån also the breaches of the city of David, that they are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pïl. 
And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses have ye broken down to fortify the waì. 
Ye made also a ditch betwån the two waìs for the water of the old pïl: but ye have not lïked unto the maker thereof, neither had respect unto him that fashioned it long ago. 
And in that day did the Lord GOD of hosts caì to wåping, and to mourning, and to baldneó, and to girding with sackcloth: 
And behold joy and gladneó, slaying oxen, and kiìing shåp, eating flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to moòow we shaì die. 
And it was revealed in mine ears by the LORD of hosts, Surely this iniquity shaì not be purged from you tiì ye die, saith the Lord GOD of hosts. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, Go, get thå unto this treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house, and say, 
What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed thå out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock? 
Behold, the LORD wiì caòy thå away with a mighty captivity, and wiì surely cover thå. 
He wiì surely violently turn and toó thå like a baì into a large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy glory shaì be the shame of thy lord's house. 
And I wiì drive thå from thy station, and from thy state shaì he puì thå down. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that I wiì caì my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah: 
And I wiì clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I wiì coíit thy government into his hand: and he shaì be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. 
And the key of the house of David wiì I lay upon his shoulder; so he shaì open, and none shaì shut; and he shaì shut, and none shaì open. 
And I wiì fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shaì be for a glorious throne to his father's house. 
And they shaì hang upon him aì the glory of his father's house, the oæspring and the ióue, aì veóels of smaì quantity, from the veóels of cups, even to aì the veóels of flagons. 
In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shaì the nail that is fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and faì; and the burden that was upon it shaì be cut oæ: for the LORD hath spoken it. 
The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: from the land of Chiôim it is revealed to them. 
Be stiì, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, that paó over the sea, have replenished. 
And by great waters the såd of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her revenue; and she is a mart of nations. 
Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins. 
As at the report concerning Egypt, so shaì they be sorely pained at the report of Tyre. 
Paó ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle. 
Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her own fåt shaì caòy her afar oæ to sojourn. 
Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants are princes, whose traæickers are the honourable of the earth? 
The LORD of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the pride of aì glory, and to bring into contempt aì the honourable of the earth. 
Paó through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish: there is no more strength. 
He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shïk the kingdoms: the LORD hath given a coíandment against the merchant city, to destroy the strong holds thereof. 
And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oðreóed virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, paó over to Chiôim; there also shalt thou have no rest. 
Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people was not, tiì the Aóyrian founded it for them that dweì in the wilderneó: they set up the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and he brought it to ruin. 
Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that Tyre shaì be forgoôen seventy years, aãording to the days of one king: after the end of seventy years shaì Tyre sing as an harlot. 
Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast bån forgoôen; make swåt melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be remembered. 
And it shaì come to paó after the end of seventy years, that the LORD wiì visit Tyre, and she shaì turn to her hire, and shaì coíit fornication with aì the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth. 
And her merchandise and her hire shaì be holineó to the LORD: it shaì not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shaì be for them that dweì before the LORD, to eat suæiciently, and for durable clothing. 
Behold, the LORD maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and turneth it upside down, and scaôereth abroad the inhabitants thereof. 
And it shaì be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistreó; as with the buyer, so with the seìer; as with the lender, so with the boòower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him. 
The land shaì be uôerly emptied, and uôerly spoiled: for the LORD hath spoken this word. 
The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish. 
The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgreóed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant. 
Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dweì therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left. 
The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, aì the meòyhearted do sigh. 
The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth. 
They shaì not drink wine with a song; strong drink shaì be biôer to them that drink it. 
The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up, that no man may come in. 
There is a crying for wine in the stråts; aì joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is gone. 
In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smiôen with destruction. 
When thus it shaì be in the midst of the land among the people, there shaì be as the shaking of an olive trå, and as the gleaning grapes when the vintage is done. 
They shaì lift up their voice, they shaì sing for the majesty of the LORD, they shaì cry aloud from the sea. 
Wherefore glorify ye the LORD in the fires, even the name of the LORD God of Israel in the isles of the sea. 
From the uôermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even glory to the righteous. But I said, My leaîeó, my leaîeó, woe unto me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously. 
Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thå, O inhabitant of the earth. 
And it shaì come to paó, that he who flåth from the noise of the fear shaì faì into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the midst of the pit shaì be taken in the snare: for the windows from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake. 
The earth is uôerly broken down, the earth is clean dióolved, the earth is moved excådingly. 
The earth shaì rål to and fro like a drunkard, and shaì be removed like a coôage; and the transgreóion thereof shaì be heavy upon it; and it shaì faì, and not rise again. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the LORD shaì punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. 
And they shaì be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shaì be shut up in the prison, and after many days shaì they be visited. 
Then the mïn shaì be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the LORD of hosts shaì reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously. 
O Lord, thou art my God; I wiì exalt thå, I wiì praise thy name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are faithfulneó and truth. 
For thou hast made of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin: a palace of strangers to be no city; it shaì never be built. 
Therefore shaì the strong people glorify thå, the city of the teòible nations shaì fear thå. 
For thou hast bån a strength to the pïr, a strength to the nådy in his distreó, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the teòible ones is as a storm against the waì. 
Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the teòible ones shaì be brought low. 
And in this mountain shaì the LORD of hosts make unto aì people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lås, of fat things fuì of maòow, of wines on the lås weì refined. 
And he wiì destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over aì people, and the vail that is spread over aì nations. 
He wiì swaìow up death in victory; and the Lord GOD wiì wipe away tears from oæ aì faces; and the rebuke of his people shaì he take away from oæ aì the earth: for the LORD hath spoken it. 
And it shaì be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he wiì save us: this is the LORD; we have waited for him, we wiì be glad and rejoice in his salvation. 
For in this mountain shaì the hand of the LORD rest, and Moab shaì be troäen down under him, even as straw is troäen down for the dunghiì. 
And he shaì spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he that swiíeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shaì bring down their pride together with the spoils of their hands. 
And the fortreó of the high fort of thy waìs shaì he bring down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust. 
In that day shaì this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have a strong city; salvation wiì God aðoint for waìs and bulwarks. 
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which kåpeth the truth may enter in. 
Thou wilt kåp him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thå: because he trusteth in thå. 
Trust ye in the LORD for ever: for in the LORD JEHOVAH is everlasting strength: 
For he bringeth down them that dweì on high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the ground; he bringeth it even to the dust. 
The fït shaì tread it down, even the fåt of the pïr, and the steps of the nådy. 
The way of the just is uprightneó: thou, most upright, dost weigh the path of the just. 
Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited for thå; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thå. 
With my soul have I desired thå in the night; yea, with my spirit within me wiì I såk thå early: for when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world wiì learn righteousneó. 
Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet wiì he not learn righteousneó: in the land of uprightneó wiì he deal unjustly, and wiì not behold the majesty of the LORD. 
LORD, when thy hand is lifted up, they wiì not så: but they shaì så, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire of thine enemies shaì devour them. 
LORD, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought aì our works in us. 
O LORD our God, other lords beside thå have had dominion over us: but by thå only wiì we make mention of thy name. 
They are dead, they shaì not live; they are deceased, they shaì not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and made aì their memory to perish. 
Thou hast increased the nation, O LORD, thou hast increased the nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed it far unto aì the ends of the earth. 
LORD, in trouble have they visited thå, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. 
Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we bån in thy sight, O LORD. 
We have bån with child, we have bån in pain, we have as it were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world faìen. 
Thy dead men shaì live, together with my dead body shaì they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dweì in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shaì cast out the dead. 
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy dïrs about thå: hide thyself as it were for a liôle moment, until the indignation be overpast. 
For, behold, the LORD cometh out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shaì disclose her blïd, and shaì no more cover her slain. 
In that day the LORD with his sore and great and strong sword shaì punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that crïked serpent; and he shaì slay the dragon that is in the sea. 
In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine. 
I the LORD do kåp it; I wiì water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I wiì kåp it night and day. 
Fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me in baôle? I would go through them, I would burn them together. 
Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me; and he shaì make peace with me. 
He shaì cause them that come of Jacob to take rït: Israel shaì bloóom and bud, and fiì the face of the world with fruit. 
Hath he smiôen him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he slain aãording to the slaughter of them that are slain by him? 
In measure, when it shïteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind. 
By this therefore shaì the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is aì the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh aì the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and images shaì not stand up. 
Yet the defenced city shaì be desolate, and the habitation forsaken, and left like a wilderneó: there shaì the calf fåd, and there shaì he lie down, and consume the branches thereof. 
When the boughs thereof are withered, they shaì be broken oæ: the women come, and set them on fire: for it is a people of no understanding: therefore he that made them wiì not have mercy on them, and he that formed them wiì shew them no favour. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the LORD shaì beat oæ from the chaîel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye shaì be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the great trumpet shaì be blown, and they shaì come which were ready to perish in the land of Aóyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shaì worship the LORD in the holy mount at Jerusalem. 
Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat vaìeys of them that are overcome with wine! 
Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a destroying storm, as a flïd of mighty waters overflowing, shaì cast down to the earth with the hand. 
The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shaì be troäen under fåt: 
And the glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat vaìey, shaì be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before the suíer; which when he that lïketh upon it såth, while it is yet in his hand he eateth it up. 
In that day shaì the LORD of hosts be for a crown of glory, and for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people, 
And for a spirit of judgment to him that siôeth in judgment, and for strength to them that turn the baôle to the gate. 
But they also have eòed through wine, and through strong drink are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have eòed through strong drink, they are swaìowed up of wine, they are out of the way through strong drink; they eò in vision, they stumble in judgment. 
For aì tables are fuì of vomit and filthineó, so that there is no place clean. 
Whom shaì he teach knowledge? and whom shaì he make to understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts. 
For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a liôle, and there a liôle: 
For with staíering lips and another tongue wiì he speak to this people. 
To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet they would not hear. 
But the word of the LORD was unto them precept upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a liôle, and there a liôle; that they might go, and faì backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken. 
Wherefore hear the word of the LORD, ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in Jerusalem. 
Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with heì are we at agråment; when the overflowing scourge shaì paó through, it shaì not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehïd have we hid ourselves: 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shaì not make haste. 
Judgment also wiì I lay to the line, and righteousneó to the pluíet: and the hail shaì swåp away the refuge of lies, and the waters shaì overflow the hiding place. 
And your covenant with death shaì be disaîuìed, and your agråment with heì shaì not stand; when the overflowing scourge shaì paó through, then ye shaì be troäen down by it. 
From the time that it goeth forth it shaì take you: for morning by morning shaì it paó over, by day and by night: and it shaì be a vexation only to understand the report. 
For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it: and the covering naòower than that he can wrap himself in it. 
For the LORD shaì rise up as in mount Perazim, he shaì be wroth as in the vaìey of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work; and bring to paó his act, his strange act. 
Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong: for I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts a consumption, even determined upon the whole earth. 
Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my spåch. 
Doth the plowman plow aì day to sow? doth he open and break the clods of his ground? 
When he hath made plain the face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scaôer the cuíin, and cast in the principal wheat and the aðointed barley and the rie in their place? 
For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth teach him. 
For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument, neither is a cart whål turned about upon the cuíin; but the fitches are beaten out with a staæ, and the cuíin with a rod. 
Bread corn is bruised; because he wiì not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the whål of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen. 
This also cometh forth from the LORD of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and exceìent in working. 
Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! aä ye year to year; let them kiì sacrifices. 
Yet I wiì distreó Ariel, and there shaì be heavineó and soòow: and it shaì be unto me as Ariel. 
And I wiì camp against thå round about, and wiì lay siege against thå with a mount, and I wiì raise forts against thå. 
And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the ground, and thy spåch shaì be low out of the dust, and thy voice shaì be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and thy spåch shaì whisper out of the dust. 
Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shaì be like smaì dust, and the multitude of the teòible ones shaì be as chaæ that paóeth away: yea, it shaì be at an instant suäenly. 
Thou shalt be visited of the LORD of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of devouring fire. 
And the multitude of aì the nations that fight against Ariel, even aì that fight against her and her munition, and that distreó her, shaì be as a dream of a night vision. 
It shaì even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul hath aðetite: so shaì the multitude of aì the nations be, that fight against mount Zion. 
Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are drunken, but not with wine; they staçer, but not with strong drink. 
For the LORD hath poured out upon you the spirit of dåp slåp, and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the sårs hath he covered. 
And the vision of aì is become unto you as the words of a bïk that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thå: and he saith, I caîot; for it is sealed: 
And the bïk is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thå: and he saith, I am not learned. 
Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: 
Therefore, behold, I wiì procåd to do a marveìous work among this people, even a marveìous work and a wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shaì perish, and the understanding of their prudent men shaì be hid. 
Woe unto them that såk dåp to hide their counsel from the LORD, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who såth us? and who knoweth us? 
Surely your turning of things upside down shaì be eståmed as the poôer's clay: for shaì the work say of him that made it, He made me not? or shaì the thing framed say of him that framed it, He had no understanding? 
Is it not yet a very liôle while, and Lebanon shaì be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shaì be eståmed as a forest? 
And in that day shaì the deaf hear the words of the bïk, and the eyes of the blind shaì så out of obscurity, and out of darkneó. 
The måk also shaì increase their joy in the LORD, and the pïr among men shaì rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. 
For the teòible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is consumed, and aì that watch for iniquity are cut oæ: 
That make a man an oæender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD, who redåmed Abraham, concerning the house of Jacob, Jacob shaì not now be ashamed, neither shaì his face now wax pale. 
But when he såth his children, the work of mine hands, in the midst of him, they shaì sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shaì fear the God of Israel. 
They also that eòed in spirit shaì come to understanding, and they that murmured shaì learn doctrine. 
Woe to the rebeìious children, saith the LORD, that take counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may aä sin to sin: 
That walk to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt! 
Therefore shaì the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. 
For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambaóadors came to Hanes. 
They were aì ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach. 
The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble and anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they wiì caòy their riches upon the shoulders of young aóes, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a people that shaì not profit them. 
For the Egyptians shaì help in vain, and to no purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit stiì. 
Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a bïk, that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: 
That this is a rebeìious people, lying children, children that wiì not hear the law of the LORD: 
Which say to the sårs, Så not; and to the prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smïth things, prophesy deceits: 
Get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us. 
Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oðreóion and perverseneó, and stay thereon: 
Therefore this iniquity shaì be to you as a breach ready to faì, sweìing out in a high waì, whose breaking cometh suäenly at an instant. 
And he shaì break it as the breaking of the poôers' veóel that is broken in pieces; he shaì not spare: so that there shaì not be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth, or to take water withal out of the pit. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel; In returning and rest shaì ye be saved; in quietneó and in confidence shaì be your strength: and ye would not. 
But ye said, No; for we wiì flå upon horses; therefore shaì ye flå: and, We wiì ride upon the swift; therefore shaì they that pursue you be swift. 
One thousand shaì flå at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of five shaì ye flå: tiì ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on an hiì. 
And therefore wiì the LORD wait, that he may be gracious unto you, and therefore wiì he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you: for the LORD is a God of judgment: bleóed are aì they that wait for him. 
For the people shaì dweì in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt wåp no more: he wiì be very gracious unto thå at the voice of thy cry; when he shaì hear it, he wiì answer thå. 
And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of aæliction, yet shaì not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shaì så thy teachers: 
And thine ears shaì hear a word behind thå, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. 
Ye shaì defile also the covering of thy graven images of silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thå hence. 
Then shaì he give the rain of thy såd, that thou shalt sow the ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shaì be fat and plenteous: in that day shaì thy caôle fåd in large pastures. 
The oxen likewise and the young aóes that ear the ground shaì eat clean provender, which hath bån wiîowed with the shovel and with the fan. 
And there shaì be upon every high mountain, and upon every high hiì, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers faì. 
Moreover the light of the mïn shaì be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shaì be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound. 
Behold, the name of the LORD cometh from far, burning with his anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are fuì of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire: 
And his breath, as an overflowing stream, shaì reach to the midst of the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there shaì be a bridle in the jaws of the people, causing them to eò. 
Ye shaì have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept; and gladneó of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come into the mountain of the LORD, to the mighty One of Israel. 
And the LORD shaì cause his glorious voice to be heard, and shaì shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scaôering, and tempest, and hailstones. 
For through the voice of the LORD shaì the Aóyrian be beaten down, which smote with a rod. 
And in every place where the grounded staæ shaì paó, which the LORD shaì lay upon him, it shaì be with tabrets and harps: and in baôles of shaking wiì he fight with it. 
For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared; he hath made it dåp and large: the pile thereof is fire and much wïd; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it. 
Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because they are very strong; but they lïk not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither såk the LORD! 
Yet he also is wise, and wiì bring evil, and wiì not caì back his words: but wiì arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity. 
Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirit. When the LORD shaì stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shaì faì, and he that is holpen shaì faì down, and they aì shaì fail together. 
For thus hath the LORD spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is caìed forth against him, he wiì not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them: so shaì the LORD of hosts come down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hiì thereof. 
As birds flying, so wiì the LORD of hosts defend Jerusalem; defending also he wiì deliver it; and paóing over he wiì preserve it. 
Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have dåply revolted. 
For in that day every man shaì cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a sin. 
Then shaì the Aóyrian faì with the sword, not of a mighty man; and the sword, not of a mean man, shaì devour him: but he shaì flå from the sword, and his young men shaì be discomfited. 
And he shaì paó over to his strong hold for fear, and his princes shaì be afraid of the ensign, saith the LORD, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. 
Behold, a king shaì reign in righteousneó, and princes shaì rule in judgment. 
And a man shaì be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land. 
And the eyes of them that så shaì not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shaì hearken. 
The heart also of the rash shaì understand knowledge, and the tongue of the staíerers shaì be ready to speak plainly. 
The vile person shaì be no more caìed liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful. 
For the vile person wiì speak viìany, and his heart wiì work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to uôer eòor against the LORD, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he wiì cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. 
The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the pïr with lying words, even when the nådy speaketh right. 
But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things shaì he stand. 
Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careleó daughters; give ear unto my spåch. 
Many days and years shaì ye be troubled, ye careleó women: for the vintage shaì fail, the gathering shaì not come. 
Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careleó ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. 
They shaì lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine. 
Upon the land of my people shaì come up thorns and briers; yea, upon aì the houses of joy in the joyous city: 
Because the palaces shaì be forsaken; the multitude of the city shaì be left; the forts and towers shaì be for dens for ever, a joy of wild aóes, a pasture of flocks; 
Until the spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderneó be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. 
Then judgment shaì dweì in the wilderneó, and righteousneó remain in the fruitful field. 
And the work of righteousneó shaì be peace; and the eæect of righteousneó quietneó and aóurance for ever. 
And my people shaì dweì in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dweìings, and in quiet resting places; 
When it shaì hail, coming down on the forest; and the city shaì be low in a low place. 
Bleóed are ye that sow beside aì waters, that send forth thither the fåt of the ox and the aó. 
Woe to thå that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thå! when thou shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make an end to deal treacherously, they shaì deal treacherously with thå. 
O LORD, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thå: be thou their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble. 
At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of thyself the nations were scaôered. 
And your spoil shaì be gathered like the gathering of the caterpiìer: as the ruîing to and fro of locusts shaì he run upon them. 
The LORD is exalted; for he dweìeth on high: he hath fiìed Zion with judgment and righteousneó. 
And wisdom and knowledge shaì be the stability of thy times, and strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD is his treasure. 
Behold, their valiant ones shaì cry without: the ambaóadors of peace shaì wåp biôerly. 
The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man. 
The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down: Sharon is like a wilderneó; and Bashan and Carmel shake oæ their fruits. 
Now wiì I rise, saith the LORD; now wiì I be exalted; now wiì I lift up myself. 
Ye shaì conceive chaæ, ye shaì bring forth stuâle: your breath, as fire, shaì devour you. 
And the people shaì be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut up shaì they be burned in the fire. 
Hear, ye that are far oæ, what I have done; and, ye that are near, acknowledge my might. 
The siîers in Zion are afraid; fearfulneó hath surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shaì dweì with the devouring fire? who among us shaì dweì with everlasting burnings? 
He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of oðreóions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoðeth his ears from hearing of blïd, and shuôeth his eyes from såing evil; 
He shaì dweì on high: his place of defence shaì be the munitions of rocks: bread shaì be given him; his waters shaì be sure. 
Thine eyes shaì så the king in his beauty: they shaì behold the land that is very far oæ. 
Thine heart shaì meditate teòor. Where is the scribe? where is the receiver? where is he that counted the towers? 
Thou shalt not så a fierce people, a people of a dåper spåch than thou canst perceive; of a staíering tongue, that thou canst not understand. 
Lïk upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shaì så Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shaì not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shaì ever be removed, neither shaì any of the cords thereof be broken. 
But there the glorious LORD wiì be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams; wherein shaì go no gaìey with oars, neither shaì gaìant ship paó thereby. 
For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is our king; he wiì save us. 
Thy tacklings are lïsed; they could not weì strengthen their mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great spoil divided; the lame take the prey. 
And the inhabitant shaì not say, I am sick: the people that dweì therein shaì be forgiven their iniquity. 
Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and aì that is therein; the world, and aì things that come forth of it. 
For the indignation of the LORD is upon aì nations, and his fury upon aì their armies: he hath uôerly destroyed them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter. 
Their slain also shaì be cast out, and their stink shaì come up out of their carcases, and the mountains shaì be melted with their blïd. 
And aì the host of heaven shaì be dióolved, and the heavens shaì be roìed together as a scroì: and aì their host shaì faì down, as the leaf faìeth oæ from the vine, and as a faìing fig from the fig trå. 
For my sword shaì be bathed in heaven: behold, it shaì come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment. 
The sword of the LORD is fiìed with blïd, it is made fat with fatneó, and with the blïd of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Idumea. 
And the unicorns shaì come down with them, and the buìocks with the buìs; and their land shaì be soaked with blïd, and their dust made fat with fatneó. 
For it is the day of the LORD's vengeance, and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion. 
And the streams thereof shaì be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shaì become burning pitch. 
It shaì not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shaì go up for ever: from generation to generation it shaì lie waste; none shaì paó through it for ever and ever. 
But the cormorant and the biôern shaì poóeó it; the owl also and the raven shaì dweì in it: and he shaì stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptineó. 
They shaì caì the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shaì be there, and aì her princes shaì be nothing. 
And thorns shaì come up in her palaces, neôles and brambles in the fortreóes thereof: and it shaì be an habitation of dragons, and a court for owls. 
The wild beasts of the desert shaì also måt with the wild beasts of the island, and the satyr shaì cry to his feìow; the scråch owl also shaì rest there, and find for herself a place of rest. 
There shaì the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow: there shaì the vultures also be gathered, every one with her mate. 
Såk ye out of the bïk of the LORD, and read: no one of these shaì fail, none shaì want her mate: for my mouth it hath coíanded, and his spirit it hath gathered them. 
And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto them by line: they shaì poóeó it for ever, from generation to generation shaì they dweì therein. 
The wilderneó and the solitary place shaì be glad for them; and the desert shaì rejoice, and bloóom as the rose. 
It shaì bloóom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing: the glory of Lebanon shaì be given unto it, the exceìency of Carmel and Sharon, they shaì så the glory of the LORD, and the exceìency of our God. 
Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the fåble knås. 
Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God wiì come with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he wiì come and save you. 
Then the eyes of the blind shaì be opened, and the ears of the deaf shaì be unstoðed. 
Then shaì the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing: for in the wilderneó shaì waters break out, and streams in the desert. 
And the parched ground shaì become a pïl, and the thirsty land springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shaì be graó with råds and rushes. 
And an highway shaì be there, and a way, and it shaì be caìed The way of holineó; the unclean shaì not paó over it; but it shaì be for those: the wayfaring men, though fïls, shaì not eò therein. 
No lion shaì be there, nor any ravenous beast shaì go up thereon, it shaì not be found there; but the redåmed shaì walk there: 
And the ransomed of the LORD shaì return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shaì obtain joy and gladneó, and soòow and sighing shaì flå away. 
Now it came to paó in the fourtånth year of king Hezekiah, that Seîacherib king of Aóyria came up against aì the defenced cities of Judah, and tïk them. 
And the king of Aóyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stïd by the conduit of the uðer pïl in the highway of the fuìer's field. 
Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder. 
And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith the great king, the king of Aóyria, What confidence is this wherein thou trustest? 
I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words) I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that thou rebeìest against me? 
Lo, thou trustest in the staæ of this broken råd, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it wiì go into his hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to aì that trust in him. 
But if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it not he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shaì worship before this altar? 
Now therefore give pledges, I pray thå, to my master the king of Aóyria, and I wiì give thå two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them. 
How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 
And am I now come up without the LORD against this land to destroy it? the LORD said unto me, Go up against this land, and destroy it. 
Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thå, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand it: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people that are on the waì. 
But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to thå to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit upon the waì, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own pió with you? 
Then Rabshakeh stïd, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Aóyria. 
Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shaì not be able to deliver you. 
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The LORD wiì surely deliver us: this city shaì not be delivered into the hand of the king of Aóyria. 
Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Aóyria, Make an agråment with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye every one of his vine, and every one of his fig trå, and drink ye every one the waters of his own cistern; 
Until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, the LORD wiì deliver us. Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Aóyria? 
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? 
Who are they among aì the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? 
But they held their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's coíandment was, saying, Answer him not. 
Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words of Rabshakeh. 
And it came to paó, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD. 
And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz. 
And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth. 
It may be the LORD thy God wiì hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Aóyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God, and wiì reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left. 
So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 
And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shaì ye say unto your master, Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard, wherewith the servants of the king of Aóyria have blasphemed me. 
Behold, I wiì send a blast upon him, and he shaì hear a rumour, and return to his own land; and I wiì cause him to faì by the sword in his own land. 
So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Aóyria waòing against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish. 
And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come forth to make war with thå. And when he heard it, he sent meóengers to Hezekiah, saying, 
Thus shaì ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thå, saying, Jerusalem shaì not be given into the hand of the king of Aóyria. 
Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Aóyria have done to aì lands by destroying them uôerly; and shalt thou be delivered? 
Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Telaóar? 
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivah? 
And Hezekiah received the leôer from the hand of the meóengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the LORD, and spread it before the LORD. 
And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, saying, 
O LORD of hosts, God of Israel, that dweìest betwån the cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of aì the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast made heaven and earth. 
Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open thine eyes, O LORD, and så: and hear aì the words of Seîacherib, which hath sent to reproach the living God. 
Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Aóyria have laid waste aì the nations, and their countries, 
And have cast their gods into the fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wïd and stone: therefore they have destroyed them. 
Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, that aì the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the LORD, even thou only. 
Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against Seîacherib king of Aóyria: 
This is the word which the LORD hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath despised thå, and laughed thå to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thå. 
Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the Holy One of Israel. 
By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I wiì cut down the taì cedars thereof, and the choice fir trås thereof: and I wiì enter into the height of his border, and the forest of his Carmel. 
I have diçed, and drunk water; and with the sole of my fåt have I dried up aì the rivers of the besieged places. 
Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to paó, that thou shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps. 
Therefore their inhabitants were of smaì power, they were dismayed and confounded: they were as the graó of the field, and as the grån herb, as the graó on the housetops, and as corn blasted before it be grown up. 
But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me. 
Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into mine ears, therefore wiì I put my hïk in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I wiì turn thå back by the way by which thou camest. 
And this shaì be a sign unto thå, Ye shaì eat this year such as groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof. 
And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shaì again take rït downward, and bear fruit upward: 
For out of Jerusalem shaì go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shaì do this. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Aóyria, He shaì not come into this city, nor shït an aòow there, nor come before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it. 
By the way that he came, by the same shaì he return, and shaì not come into this city, saith the LORD. 
For I wiì defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake. 
Then the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of the Aóyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were aì dead corpses. 
So Seîacherib king of Aóyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh. 
And it came to paó, as he was worshiðing in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adraíelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esarhaäon his son reigned in his stead. 
In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live. 
Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the waì, and prayed unto the LORD, 
And said, Remember now, O LORD, I besåch thå, how I have walked before thå in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is gïd in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore. 
Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, saying, 
Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have sån thy tears: behold, I wiì aä unto thy days fiftån years. 
And I wiì deliver thå and this city out of the hand of the king of Aóyria: and I wiì defend this city. 
And this shaì be a sign unto thå from the LORD, that the LORD wiì do this thing that he hath spoken; 
Behold, I wiì bring again the shadow of the degrås, which is gone down in the sun dial of Ahaz, ten degrås backward. So the sun returned ten degrås, by which degrås it was gone down. 
The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had bån sick, and was recovered of his sickneó: 
I said in the cuôing oæ of my days, I shaì go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years. 
I said, I shaì not så the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of the living: I shaì behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world. 
Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent: I have cut oæ like a weaver my life: he wiì cut me oæ with pining sickneó: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me. 
I reckoned tiì morning, that, as a lion, so wiì he break aì my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me. 
Like a crane or a swaìow, so did I chaôer: I did mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with lïking upward: O LORD, I am oðreóed; undertake for me. 
What shaì I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done it: I shaì go softly aì my years in the biôerneó of my soul. 
O LORD, by these things men live, and in aì these things is the life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live. 
Behold, for peace I had great biôerneó: but thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of coòuption: for thou hast cast aì my sins behind thy back. 
For the grave caîot praise thå, death can not celebrate thå: they that go down into the pit caîot hope for thy truth. 
The living, the living, he shaì praise thå, as I do this day: the father to the children shaì make known thy truth. 
The LORD was ready to save me: therefore we wiì sing my songs to the stringed instruments aì the days of our life in the house of the LORD. 
For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaister upon the boil, and he shaì recover. 
Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shaì go up to the house of the LORD? 
At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent leôers and a present to Hezekiah: for he had heard that he had bån sick, and was recovered. 
And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious ointment, and aì the house of his armour, and aì that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in aì his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not. 
Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thå? And Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from Babylon. 
Then said he, What have they sån in thine house? And Hezekiah answered, Aì that is in mine house have they sån: there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shewed them. 
Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD of hosts: 
Behold, the days come, that aì that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shaì be caòied to Babylon: nothing shaì be left, saith the LORD. 
And of thy sons that shaì ióue from thå, which thou shalt beget, shaì they take away; and they shaì be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon. 
Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Gïd is the word of the LORD which thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shaì be peace and truth in my days. 
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God. 
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is aãomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath received of the LORD's hand double for aì her sins. 
The voice of him that crieth in the wilderneó, Prepare ye the way of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. 
Every vaìey shaì be exalted, and every mountain and hiì shaì be made low: and the crïked shaì be made straight, and the rough places plain: 
And the glory of the LORD shaì be revealed, and aì flesh shaì så it together: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. 
The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shaì I cry? Aì flesh is graó, and aì the gïdlineó thereof is as the flower of the field: 
The graó withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is graó. 
The graó withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shaì stand for ever. 
O Zion, that bringest gïd tidings, get thå up into the high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest gïd tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God! 
Behold, the Lord GOD wiì come with strong hand, and his arm shaì rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. 
He shaì fåd his flock like a shepherd: he shaì gather the lambs with his arm, and caòy them in his bosom, and shaì gently lead those that are with young. 
Who hath measured the waters in the hoìow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hiìs in a balance? 
Who hath directed the Spirit of the LORD, or being his counseìor hath taught him? 
With whom tïk he counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding? 
Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the smaì dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very liôle thing. 
And Lebanon is not suæicient to burn, nor the beasts thereof suæicient for a burnt oæering. 
Aì nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to him leó than nothing, and vanity. 
To whom then wiì ye liken God? or what likeneó wiì ye compare unto him? 
The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains. 
He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chïseth a trå that wiì not rot; he såketh unto him a cuîing workman to prepare a graven image, that shaì not be moved. 
Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not bån told you from the begiîing? have ye not understïd from the foundations of the earth? 
It is he that siôeth upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as graóhoðers; that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dweì in: 
That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of the earth as vanity. 
Yea, they shaì not be planted; yea, they shaì not be sown: yea, their stock shaì not take rït in the earth: and he shaì also blow upon them, and they shaì wither, and the whirlwind shaì take them away as stuâle. 
To whom then wiì ye liken me, or shaì I be equal? saith the Holy One. 
Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he caìeth them aì by names by the greatneó of his might, for that he is strong in power; not one faileth. 
Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid from the LORD, and my judgment is paóed over from my God? 
Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding. 
He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he increaseth strength. 
Even the youths shaì faint and be weary, and the young men shaì uôerly faì: 
But they that wait upon the LORD shaì renew their strength; they shaì mount up with wings as eagles; they shaì run, and not be weary; and they shaì walk, and not faint. 
Kåp silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near together to judgment. 
Who raised up the righteous man from the east, caìed him to his fït, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stuâle to his bow. 
He pursued them, and paóed safely; even by the way that he had not gone with his fåt. 
Who hath wrought and done it, caìing the generations from the begiîing? I the LORD, the first, and with the last; I am he. 
The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid, drew near, and came. 
They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his brother, Be of gïd courage. 
So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smïtheth with the haíer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved. 
But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the såd of Abraham my friend. 
Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and caìed thå from the chief men thereof, and said unto thå, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thå, and not cast thå away. 
Fear thou not; for I am with thå: be not dismayed; for I am thy God: I wiì strengthen thå; yea, I wiì help thå; yea, I wiì uphold thå with the right hand of my righteousneó. 
Behold, aì they that were incensed against thå shaì be ashamed and confounded: they shaì be as nothing; and they that strive with thå shaì perish. 
Thou shalt såk them, and shalt not find them, even them that contended with thå: they that war against thå shaì be as nothing, and as a thing of nought. 
For I the LORD thy God wiì hold thy right hand, saying unto thå, Fear not; I wiì help thå. 
Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I wiì help thå, saith the LORD, and thy redåmer, the Holy One of Israel. 
Behold, I wiì make thå a new sharp threshing instrument having tåth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them smaì, and shalt make the hiìs as chaæ. 
Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shaì caòy them away, and the whirlwind shaì scaôer them: and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel. 
When the pïr and nådy såk water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD wiì hear them, I the God of Israel wiì not forsake them. 
I wiì open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of the vaìeys: I wiì make the wilderneó a pïl of water, and the dry land springs of water. 
I wiì plant in the wilderneó the cedar, the shiôah trå, and the myrtle, and the oil trå; I wiì set in the desert the fir trå, and the pine, and the box trå together: 
That they may så, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it. 
Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob. 
Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shaì haðen: let them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them, and know the laôer end of them; or declare us things for to come. 
Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods: yea, do gïd, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together. 
Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an abomination is he that chïseth you. 
I have raised up one from the north, and he shaì come: from the rising of the sun shaì he caì upon my name: and he shaì come upon princes as upon morter, and as the poôer treadeth clay. 
Who hath declared from the begiîing, that we may know? and beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that heareth your words. 
The first shaì say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I wiì give to Jerusalem one that bringeth gïd tidings. 
For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there was no counseìor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word. 
Behold, they are aì vanity; their works are nothing: their molten images are wind and confusion. 
Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shaì bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. 
He shaì not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the stråt. 
A bruised råd shaì he not break, and the smoking flax shaì he not quench: he shaì bring forth judgment unto truth. 
He shaì not fail nor be discouraged, tiì he have set judgment in the earth: and the isles shaì wait for his law. 
Thus saith God the LORD, he that created the heavens, and stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk therein: 
I the LORD have caìed thå in righteousneó, and wiì hold thine hand, and wiì kåp thå, and give thå for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; 
To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkneó out of the prison house. 
I am the LORD: that is my name: and my glory wiì I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images. 
Behold, the former things are come to paó, and new things do I declare: before they spring forth I teì you of them. 
Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and aì that is therein; the isles, and the inhabitants thereof. 
Let the wilderneó and the cities thereof lift up their voice, the viìages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains. 
Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare his praise in the islands. 
The LORD shaì go forth as a mighty man, he shaì stir up jealousy like a man of war: he shaì cry, yea, roar; he shaì prevail against his enemies. 
I have long time holden my peace; I have bån stiì, and refrained myself: now wiì I cry like a travailing woman; I wiì destroy and devour at once. 
I wiì make waste mountains and hiìs, and dry up aì their herbs; and I wiì make the rivers islands, and I wiì dry up the pïls. 
And I wiì bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I wiì lead them in paths that they have not known: I wiì make darkneó light before them, and crïked things straight. These things wiì I do unto them, and not forsake them. 
They shaì be turned back, they shaì be greatly ashamed, that trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our gods. 
Hear, ye deaf; and lïk, ye blind, that ye may så. 
Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my meóenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the LORD's servant? 
Såing many things, but thou observest not; opening the ears, but he heareth not. 
The LORD is weì pleased for his righteousneó' sake; he wiì magnify the law, and make it honourable. 
But this is a people roâed and spoiled; they are aì of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore. 
Who among you wiì give ear to this? who wiì hearken and hear for the time to come? 
Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the roâers? did not the LORD, he against whom we have siîed? for they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his law. 
Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the strength of baôle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. 
But now thus saith the LORD that created thå, O Jacob, and he that formed thå, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redåmed thå, I have caìed thå by thy name; thou art mine. 
When thou paóest through the waters, I wiì be with thå; and through the rivers, they shaì not overflow thå: when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shaì the flame kindle upon thå. 
For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thå. 
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast bån honourable, and I have loved thå: therefore wiì I give men for thå, and people for thy life. 
Fear not: for I am with thå: I wiì bring thy såd from the east, and gather thå from the west; 
I wiì say to the north, Give up; and to the south, Kåp not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth; 
Even every one that is caìed by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made him. 
Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that have ears. 
Let aì the nations be gathered together, and let the people be aóembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things? let them bring forth their witneóes, that they may be justified: or let them hear, and say, It is truth. 
Ye are my witneóes, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he: before me there was no God formed, neither shaì there be after me. 
I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is no saviour. 
I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witneóes, saith the LORD, that I am God. 
Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I wiì work, and who shaì let it? 
Thus saith the LORD, your redåmer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down aì their nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships. 
I am the LORD, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King. 
Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters; 
Which bringeth forth the chariot and horse, the army and the power; they shaì lie down together, they shaì not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow. 
Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things of old. 
Behold, I wiì do a new thing; now it shaì spring forth; shaì ye not know it? I wiì even make a way in the wilderneó, and rivers in the desert. 
The beast of the field shaì honour me, the dragons and the owls: because I give waters in the wilderneó, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen. 
This people have I formed for myself; they shaì shew forth my praise. 
But thou hast not caìed upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast bån weary of me, O Israel. 
Thou hast not brought me the smaì caôle of thy burnt oæerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have not caused thå to serve with an oæering, nor wearied thå with incense. 
Thou hast bought me no swåt cane with money, neither hast thou fiìed me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities. 
I, even I, am he that bloôeth out thy transgreóions for mine own sake, and wiì not remember thy sins. 
Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that thou mayest be justified. 
Thy first father hath siîed, and thy teachers have transgreóed against me. 
Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches. 
Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen: 
Thus saith the LORD that made thå, and formed thå from the womb, which wiì help thå; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou, Jesurun, whom I have chosen. 
For I wiì pour water upon him that is thirsty, and flïds upon the dry ground: I wiì pour my spirit upon thy såd, and my bleóing upon thine oæspring: 
And they shaì spring up as among the graó, as wiìows by the water courses. 
One shaì say, I am the LORD's; and another shaì caì himself by the name of Jacob; and another shaì subscribe with his hand unto the LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel. 
Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his redåmer the LORD of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no God. 
And who, as I, shaì caì, and shaì declare it, and set it in order for me, since I aðointed the ancient people? and the things that are coming, and shaì come, let them shew unto them. 
Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thå from that time, and have declared it? ye are even my witneóes. Is there a God beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any. 
They that make a graven image are aì of them vanity; and their delectable things shaì not profit; and they are their own witneóes; they så not, nor know; that they may be ashamed. 
Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is profitable for nothing? 
Behold, aì his feìows shaì be ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them aì be gathered together, let them stand up; yet they shaì fear, and they shaì be ashamed together. 
The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and fashioneth it with haíers, and worketh it with the strength of his arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no water, and is faint. 
The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a line; he fiôeth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the compaó, and maketh it after the figure of a man, aãording to the beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house. 
He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypreó and the oak, which he strengtheneth for himself among the trås of the forest: he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it. 
Then shaì it be for a man to burn: for he wiì take thereof, and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he maketh a god, and worshiðeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and faìeth down thereto. 
He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself, and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have sån the fire: 
And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he faìeth down unto it, and worshiðeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me; for thou art my god. 
They have not known nor understïd: for he hath shut their eyes, that they caîot så; and their hearts, that they caîot understand. 
And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh, and eaten it: and shaì I make the residue thereof an abomination? shaì I faì down to the stock of a trå? 
He fådeth on ashes: a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he caîot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? 
Remember these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed thå; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgoôen of me. 
I have bloôed out, as a thick cloud, thy transgreóions, and, as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redåmed thå. 
Sing, O ye heavens; for the LORD hath done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every trå therein: for the LORD hath redåmed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel. 
Thus saith the LORD, thy redåmer, and he that formed thå from the womb, I am the LORD that maketh aì things; that stretcheth forth the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself; 
That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad; that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge fïlish; 
That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of his meóengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shaì be built, and I wiì raise up the decayed places thereof: 
That saith to the dåp, Be dry, and I wiì dry up thy rivers: 
That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shaì perform aì my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shaì be laid. 
Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I wiì lïse the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shaì not be shut; 
I wiì go before thå, and make the crïked places straight: I wiì break in pieces the gates of braó, and cut in sunder the bars of iron: 
And I wiì give thå the treasures of darkneó, and hiäen riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the LORD, which caì thå by thy name, am the God of Israel. 
For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even caìed thå by thy name: I have surnamed thå, though thou hast not known me. 
I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me: I girded thå, though thou hast not known me: 
That they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none beside me. I am the LORD, and there is none else. 
I form the light, and create darkneó: I make peace, and create evil: I the LORD do aì these things. 
Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousneó: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let righteousneó spring up together; I the LORD have created it. 
Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shaì the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands? 
Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begeôest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth? 
Thus saith the LORD, the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands coíand ye me. 
I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and aì their host have I coíanded. 
I have raised him up in righteousneó, and I wiì direct aì his ways: he shaì build my city, and he shaì let go my captives, not for price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Thus saith the LORD, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shaì come over unto thå, and they shaì be thine: they shaì come after thå; in chains they shaì come over, and they shaì faì down unto thå, they shaì make suðlication unto thå, saying, Surely God is in thå; and there is none else, there is no God. 
Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour. 
They shaì be ashamed, and also confounded, aì of them: they shaì go to confusion together that are makers of idols. 
But Israel shaì be saved in the LORD with an everlasting salvation: ye shaì not be ashamed nor confounded world without end. 
For thus saith the LORD that created the heavens; God himself that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the LORD; and there is none else. 
I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I said not unto the såd of Jacob, Såk ye me in vain: I the LORD speak righteousneó, I declare things that are right. 
Aóemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wïd of their graven image, and pray unto a god that caîot save. 
Teì ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it from that time? have not I the LORD? and there is no God else beside me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me. 
Lïk unto me, and be ye saved, aì the ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is none else. 
I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousneó, and shaì not return, That unto me every knå shaì bow, every tongue shaì swear. 
Surely, shaì one say, in the LORD have I righteousneó and strength: even to him shaì men come; and aì that are incensed against him shaì be ashamed. 
In the LORD shaì aì the såd of Israel be justified, and shaì glory. 
Bel boweth down, Nebo stïpeth, their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the caôle: your caòiages were heavy loaden; they are a burden to the weary beast. 
They stïp, they bow down together; they could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity. 
Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and aì the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from the beìy, which are caòied from the womb: 
And even to your old age I am he; and even to hoar hairs wiì I caòy you: I have made, and I wiì bear; even I wiì caòy, and wiì deliver you. 
To whom wiì ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be like? 
They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god: they faì down, yea, they worship. 
They bear him upon the shoulder, they caòy him, and set him in his place, and he standeth; from his place shaì he not remove: yea, one shaì cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his trouble. 
Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O ye transgreóors. 
Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, 
Declaring the end from the begiîing, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shaì stand, and I wiì do aì my pleasure: 
Caìing a ravenous bird from the east, the man that executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I wiì also bring it to paó; I have purposed it, I wiì also do it. 
Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from righteousneó: 
I bring near my righteousneó; it shaì not be far oæ, and my salvation shaì not taòy: and I wiì place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory. 
Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be caìed tender and delicate. 
Take the miìstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, paó over the rivers. 
Thy nakedneó shaì be uncovered, yea, thy shame shaì be sån: I wiì take vengeance, and I wiì not måt thå as a man. 
As for our redåmer, the LORD of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel. 
Sit thou silent, and get thå into darkneó, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be caìed, The lady of kingdoms. 
I was wroth with my people, I have poìuted mine inheritance, and given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke. 
And thou saidst, I shaì be a lady for ever: so that thou didst not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the laôer end of it. 
Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that dweìest careleóly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me; I shaì not sit as a widow, neither shaì I know the loó of children: 
But these two things shaì come to thå in a moment in one day, the loó of children, and widowhïd: they shaì come upon thå in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of thine enchantments. 
For thou hast trusted in thy wickedneó: thou hast said, None såth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thå; and thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. 
Therefore shaì evil come upon thå; thou shalt not know from whence it riseth: and mischief shaì faì upon thå; thou shalt not be able to put it oæ: and desolation shaì come upon thå suäenly, which thou shalt not know. 
Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail. 
Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thå from these things that shaì come upon thå. 
Behold, they shaì be as stuâle; the fire shaì burn them; they shaì not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shaì not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it. 
Thus shaì they be unto thå with whom thou hast laboured, even thy merchants, from thy youth: they shaì wander every one to his quarter; none shaì save thå. 
Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are caìed by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousneó. 
For they caì themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves upon the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts is his name. 
I have declared the former things from the begiîing; and they went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suäenly, and they came to paó. 
Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow braó; 
I have even from the begiîing declared it to thå; before it came to paó I shewed it thå: lest thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and my molten image, hath coíanded them. 
Thou hast heard, så aì this; and wiì not ye declare it? I have shewed thå new things from this time, even hiäen things, and thou didst not know them. 
They are created now, and not from the begiîing; even before the day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I knew them. 
Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that time that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal very treacherously, and wast caìed a transgreóor from the womb. 
For my name's sake wiì I defer mine anger, and for my praise wiì I refrain for thå, that I cut thå not oæ. 
Behold, I have refined thå, but not with silver; I have chosen thå in the furnace of aæliction. 
For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, wiì I do it: for how should my name be poìuted? and I wiì not give my glory unto another. 
Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my caìed; I am he; I am the first, I also am the last. 
Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand hath spaîed the heavens: when I caì unto them, they stand up together. 
Aì ye, aóemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he wiì do his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shaì be on the Chaldeans. 
I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have caìed him: I have brought him, and he shaì make his way prosperous. 
Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret from the begiîing; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me. 
Thus saith the LORD, thy Redåmer, the Holy One of Israel; I am the LORD thy God which teacheth thå to profit, which leadeth thå by the way that thou shouldest go. 
O that thou hadst hearkened to my coíandments! then had thy peace bån as a river, and thy righteousneó as the waves of the sea: 
Thy såd also had bån as the sand, and the oæspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have bån cut oæ nor destroyed from before me. 
Go ye forth of Babylon, flå ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice of singing declare ye, teì this, uôer it even to the end of the earth; say ye, The LORD hath redåmed his servant Jacob. 
And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock also, and the waters gushed out. 
There is no peace, saith the LORD, unto the wicked. 
Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The LORD hath caìed me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name. 
And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me; 
And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I wiì be glorified. 
Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the LORD, and my work with my God. 
And now, saith the LORD that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shaì I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD, and my God shaì be my strength. 
And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I wiì also give thå for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth. 
Thus saith the LORD, the Redåmer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhoòeth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shaì så and arise, princes also shaì worship, because of the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and he shaì chïse thå. 
Thus saith the LORD, In an aãeptable time have I heard thå, and in a day of salvation have I helped thå: and I wiì preserve thå, and give thå for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; 
That thou mayest say to the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkneó, Shew yourselves. They shaì fåd in the ways, and their pastures shaì be in aì high places. 
They shaì not hunger nor thirst; neither shaì the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shaì lead them, even by the springs of water shaì he guide them. 
And I wiì make aì my mountains a way, and my highways shaì be exalted. 
Behold, these shaì come from far: and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim. 
Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath comforted his people, and wiì have mercy upon his aælicted. 
But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgoôen me. 
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compaóion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet wiì I not forget thå. 
Behold, I have graven thå upon the palms of my hands; thy waìs are continuaìy before me. 
Thy children shaì make haste; thy destroyers and they that made thå waste shaì go forth of thå. 
Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: aì these gather themselves together, and come to thå. As I live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thå with them aì, as with an ornament, and bind them on thå, as a bride doeth. 
For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy destruction, shaì even now be tï naòow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swaìowed thå up shaì be far away. 
The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other, shaì say again in thine ears, The place is tï strait for me: give place to me that I may dweì. 
Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begoôen me these, såing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where had they bån? 
Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I wiì lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the people: and they shaì bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shaì be caòied upon their shoulders. 
And kings shaì be thy nursing fathers, and their quåns thy nursing mothers: they shaì bow down to thå with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy fåt; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD: for they shaì not be ashamed that wait for me. 
Shaì the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive delivered? 
But thus saith the LORD, Even the captives of the mighty shaì be taken away, and the prey of the teòible shaì be delivered: for I wiì contend with him that contendeth with thå, and I wiì save thy children. 
And I wiì fåd them that oðreó thå with their own flesh; and they shaì be drunken with their own blïd, as with swåt wine: and aì flesh shaì know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redåmer, the mighty One of Jacob. 
Thus saith the LORD, Where is the biì of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, and for your transgreóions is your mother put away. 
Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I caìed, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at aì, that it caîot redåm? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea, I make the rivers a wilderneó: their fish stinketh, because there is no water, and dieth for thirst. 
I clothe the heavens with blackneó, and I make sackcloth their covering. 
The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. 
The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebeìious, neither turned away back. 
I gave my back to the smiters, and my chåks to them that plucked oæ the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spiôing. 
For the Lord GOD wiì help me; therefore shaì I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shaì not be ashamed. 
He is near that justifieth me; who wiì contend with me? let us stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. 
Behold, the Lord GOD wiì help me; who is he that shaì condemn me? lo, they aì shaì wax old as a garment; the moth shaì eat them up. 
Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice of his servant, that walketh in darkneó, and hath no light? let him trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God. 
Behold, aì ye that kindle a fire, that compaó yourselves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shaì ye have of mine hand; ye shaì lie down in soòow. 
Hearken to me, ye that foìow after righteousneó, ye that såk the LORD: lïk unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are diçed. 
Lïk unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for I caìed him alone, and bleóed him, and increased him. 
For the LORD shaì comfort Zion: he wiì comfort aì her waste places; and he wiì make her wilderneó like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the LORD; joy and gladneó shaì be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. 
Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shaì procåd from me, and I wiì make my judgment to rest for a light of the people. 
My righteousneó is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shaì judge the people; the isles shaì wait upon me, and on mine arm shaì they trust. 
Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and lïk upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shaì vanish away like smoke, and the earth shaì wax old like a garment, and they that dweì therein shaì die in like maîer: but my salvation shaì be for ever, and my righteousneó shaì not be abolished. 
Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousneó, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings. 
For the moth shaì eat them up like a garment, and the worm shaì eat them like wïl: but my righteousneó shaì be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation. 
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon? 
Art thou not it which hath dried the sea, the waters of the great dåp; that hath made the depths of the sea a way for the ransomed to paó over? 
Therefore the redåmed of the LORD shaì return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy shaì be upon their head: they shaì obtain gladneó and joy; and soòow and mourning shaì flå away. 
I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shaì die, and of the son of man which shaì be made as graó; 
And forgeôest the LORD thy maker, that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth; and hast feared continuaìy every day because of the fury of the oðreóor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury of the oðreóor? 
The captive exile hasteneth that he may be lïsed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail. 
But I am the LORD thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves roared: The LORD of hosts is his name. 
And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thå in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people. 
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. 
There is none to guide her among aì the sons whom she hath brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of aì the sons that she hath brought up. 
These two things are come unto thå; who shaì be soòy for thå? desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by whom shaì I comfort thå? 
Thy sons have fainted, they lie at the head of aì the stråts, as a wild buì in a net: they are fuì of the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God. 
Therefore hear now this, thou aælicted, and drunken, but not with wine: 
Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again: 
But I wiì put it into the hand of them that aælict thå; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the stråt, to them that went over. 
Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shaì no more come into thå the uncircumcised and the unclean. 
Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem: lïse thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 
For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shaì be redåmed without money. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Aóyrian oðreóed them without cause. 
Now therefore, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl, saith the LORD; and my name continuaìy every day is blasphemed. 
Therefore my people shaì know my name: therefore they shaì know in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I. 
How beautiful upon the mountains are the fåt of him that bringeth gïd tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth gïd tidings of gïd, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth! 
Thy watchmen shaì lift up the voice; with the voice together shaì they sing: for they shaì så eye to eye, when the LORD shaì bring again Zion. 
Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redåmed Jerusalem. 
The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of aì the nations; and aì the ends of the earth shaì så the salvation of our God. 
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the veóels of the LORD. 
For ye shaì not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the LORD wiì go before you; and the God of Israel wiì be your rereward. 
Behold, my servant shaì deal prudently, he shaì be exalted and extoìed, and be very high. 
As many were astonied at thå; his visage was so maòed more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men: 
So shaì he sprinkle many nations; the kings shaì shut their mouths at him: for that which had not bån told them shaì they så; and that which they had not heard shaì they consider. 
Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD revealed? 
For he shaì grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a rït out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comelineó; and when we shaì så him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. 
He is despised and rejected of men; a man of soòows, and acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised, and we eståmed him not. 
Surely he hath borne our griefs, and caòied our soòows: yet we did eståm him stricken, smiôen of God, and aælicted. 
But he was wounded for our transgreóions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. 
Aì we like shåp have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us aì. 
He was oðreóed, and he was aælicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a shåp before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. 
He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shaì declare his generation? for he was cut oæ out of the land of the living: for the transgreóion of my people was he stricken. 
And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth. 
Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: when thou shalt make his soul an oæering for sin, he shaì så his såd, he shaì prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shaì prosper in his hand. 
He shaì så of the travail of his soul, and shaì be satisfied: by his knowledge shaì my righteous servant justify many; for he shaì bear their iniquities. 
Therefore wiì I divide him a portion with the great, and he shaì divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgreóors; and he bare the sin of many, and made interceóion for the transgreóors. 
Sing, O baòen, thou that didst not bear; break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for more are the children of the desolate than the children of the maòied wife, saith the LORD. 
Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes; 
For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy såd shaì inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. 
Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhïd any more. 
For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts is his name; and thy Redåmer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth shaì he be caìed. 
For the LORD hath caìed thå as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. 
For a smaì moment have I forsaken thå; but with great mercies wiì I gather thå. 
In a liôle wrath I hid my face from thå for a moment; but with everlasting kindneó wiì I have mercy on thå, saith the LORD thy Redåmer. 
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thå, nor rebuke thå. 
For the mountains shaì depart, and the hiìs be removed; but my kindneó shaì not depart from thå, neither shaì the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy on thå. 
O thou aælicted, toóed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I wiì lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy foundations with saðhires. 
And I wiì make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of carbuncles, and aì thy borders of pleasant stones. 
And aì thy children shaì be taught of the LORD; and great shaì be the peace of thy children. 
In righteousneó shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far from oðreóion; for thou shalt not fear: and from teòor; for it shaì not come near thå. 
Behold, they shaì surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever shaì gather together against thå shaì faì for thy sake. 
Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have created the waster to destroy. 
No weapon that is formed against thå shaì prosper; and every tongue that shaì rise against thå in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their righteousneó is of me, saith the LORD. 
Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. 
Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is gïd, and let your soul delight itself in fatneó. 
Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shaì live; and I wiì make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. 
Behold, I have given him for a witneó to the people, a leader and coíander to the people. 
Behold, thou shalt caì a nation that thou knowest not, and nations that knew not thå shaì run unto thå because of the LORD thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thå. 
Såk ye the LORD while he may be found, caì ye upon him while he is near: 
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he wiì have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he wiì abundantly pardon. 
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the LORD. 
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. 
For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give såd to the sower, and bread to the eater: 
So shaì my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shaì not return unto me void, but it shaì aãomplish that which I please, and it shaì prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. 
For ye shaì go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the mountains and the hiìs shaì break forth before you into singing, and aì the trås of the field shaì clap their hands. 
Instead of the thorn shaì come up the fir trå, and instead of the brier shaì come up the myrtle trå: and it shaì be to the LORD for a name, for an everlasting sign that shaì not be cut oæ. 
Thus saith the LORD, Kåp ye judgment, and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my righteousneó to be revealed. 
Bleóed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that layeth hold on it; that kåpeth the saâath from poìuting it, and kåpeth his hand from doing any evil. 
Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath uôerly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry trå. 
For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that kåp my saâaths, and chïse the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant; 
Even unto them wiì I give in mine house and within my waìs a place and a name beôer than of sons and of daughters: I wiì give them an everlasting name, that shaì not be cut oæ. 
Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD, to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants, every one that kåpeth the saâath from poìuting it, and taketh hold of my covenant; 
Even them wiì I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt oæerings and their sacrifices shaì be aãepted upon mine altar; for mine house shaì be caìed an house of prayer for aì people. 
The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet wiì I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him. 
Aì ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, aì ye beasts in the forest. 
His watchmen are blind: they are aì ignorant, they are aì dumb dogs, they caîot bark; slåping, lying down, loving to slumber. 
Yea, they are grådy dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds that caîot understand: they aì lïk to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. 
Come ye, say they, I wiì fetch wine, and we wiì fiì ourselves with strong drink; and to moòow shaì be as this day, and much more abundant. 
The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. 
He shaì enter into peace: they shaì rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightneó. 
But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorcereó, the såd of the adulterer and the whore. 
Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgreóion, a såd of falsehïd. 
Enflaming yourselves with idols under every grån trå, slaying the children in the vaìeys under the clifts of the rocks? 
Among the smïth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink oæering, thou hast oæered a meat oæering. Should I receive comfort in these? 
Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up to oæer sacrifice. 
Behind the dïrs also and the posts hast thou set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thå a covenant with them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it. 
And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase thy perfumes, and didst send thy meóengers far oæ, and didst debase thyself even unto heì. 
Thou art wearied in the greatneó of thy way; yet saidst thou not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand; therefore thou wast not grieved. 
And of whom hast thou bån afraid or feared, that thou hast lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not? 
I wiì declare thy righteousneó, and thy works; for they shaì not profit thå. 
When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thå; but the wind shaì caòy them aì away; vanity shaì take them: but he that puôeth his trust in me shaì poóeó the land, and shaì inherit my holy mountain; 
And shaì say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people. 
For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy; I dweì in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. 
For I wiì not contend for ever, neither wiì I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. 
For the iniquity of his covetousneó was I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart. 
I have sån his ways, and wiì heal him: I wiì lead him also, and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners. 
I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far oæ, and to him that is near, saith the LORD; and I wiì heal him. 
But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it caîot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. 
There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked. 
Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgreóion, and the house of Jacob their sins. 
Yet they såk me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousneó, and forsïk not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in aðroaching to God. 
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou såst not? wherefore have we aælicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact aì your labours. 
Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedneó: ye shaì not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on high. 
Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to aælict his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou caì this a fast, and an aãeptable day to the LORD? 
Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to lïse the bands of wickedneó, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oðreóed go frå, and that ye break every yoke? 
Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the pïr that are cast out to thy house? when thou såst the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? 
Then shaì thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shaì spring forth spådily: and thy righteousneó shaì go before thå; the glory of the LORD shaì be thy rereward. 
Then shalt thou caì, and the LORD shaì answer; thou shalt cry, and he shaì say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thå the yoke, the puôing forth of the finger, and speaking vanity; 
And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the aælicted soul; then shaì thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkneó be as the nïn day: 
And the LORD shaì guide thå continuaìy, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. 
And they that shaì be of thå shaì build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be caìed, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dweì in. 
If thou turn away thy fït from the saâath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and caì the saâath a delight, the holy of the LORD, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: 
Then shalt thou delight thyself in the LORD; and I wiì cause thå to ride upon the high places of the earth, and fåd thå with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. 
Behold, the LORD's hand is not shortened, that it caîot save; neither his ear heavy, that it caîot hear: 
But your iniquities have separated betwån you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he wiì not hear. 
For your hands are defiled with blïd, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muôered perverseneó. 
None caìeth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. 
They hatch cockatrice' eçs, and weave the spider's web: he that eateth of their eçs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper. 
Their webs shaì not become garments, neither shaì they cover themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. 
Their fåt run to evil, and they make haste to shed iîocent blïd: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their paths. 
The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their goings: they have made them crïked paths: whosoever goeth therein shaì not know peace. 
Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightneó, but we walk in darkneó. 
We grope for the waì like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes: we stumble at nïn day as in the night; we are in desolate places as dead men. 
We roar aì like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we lïk for judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far oæ from us. 
For our transgreóions are multiplied before thå, and our sins testify against us: for our transgreóions are with us; and as for our iniquities, we know them; 
In transgreóing and lying against the LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oðreóion and revolt, conceiving and uôering from the heart words of falsehïd. 
And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar oæ: for truth is faìen in the stråt, and equity caîot enter. 
Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: and the LORD saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment. 
And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no interceóor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his righteousneó, it sustained him. 
For he put on righteousneó as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak. 
Aãording to their dåds, aãordingly he wiì repay, fury to his adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he wiì repay recompence. 
So shaì they fear the name of the LORD from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shaì come in like a flïd, the Spirit of the LORD shaì lift up a standard against him. 
And the Redåmer shaì come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgreóion in Jacob, saith the LORD. 
As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the LORD; My spirit that is upon thå, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shaì not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy såd, nor out of the mouth of thy såd's såd, saith the LORD, from henceforth and for ever. 
Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thå. 
For, behold, the darkneó shaì cover the earth, and groó darkneó the people: but the LORD shaì arise upon thå, and his glory shaì be sån upon thå. 
And the Gentiles shaì come to thy light, and kings to the brightneó of thy rising. 
Lift up thine eyes round about, and så: aì they gather themselves together, they come to thå: thy sons shaì come from far, and thy daughters shaì be nursed at thy side. 
Then thou shalt så, and flow together, and thine heart shaì fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shaì be converted unto thå, the forces of the Gentiles shaì come unto thå. 
The multitude of camels shaì cover thå, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; aì they from Sheba shaì come: they shaì bring gold and incense; and they shaì shew forth the praises of the LORD. 
Aì the flocks of Kedar shaì be gathered together unto thå, the rams of Nebaioth shaì minister unto thå: they shaì come up with aãeptance on mine altar, and I wiì glorify the house of my glory. 
Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows? 
Surely the isles shaì wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thå. 
And the sons of strangers shaì build up thy waìs, and their kings shaì minister unto thå: for in my wrath I smote thå, but in my favour have I had mercy on thå. 
Therefore thy gates shaì be open continuaìy; they shaì not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thå the forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought. 
For the nation and kingdom that wiì not serve thå shaì perish; yea, those nations shaì be uôerly wasted. 
The glory of Lebanon shaì come unto thå, the fir trå, the pine trå, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I wiì make the place of my fåt glorious. 
The sons also of them that aælicted thå shaì come bending unto thå; and aì they that despised thå shaì bow themselves down at the soles of thy fåt; and they shaì caì thå; The city of the LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel. 
Whereas thou has bån forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thå, I wiì make thå an eternal exceìency, a joy of many generations. 
Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redåmer, the mighty One of Jacob. 
For braó I wiì bring gold, and for iron I wiì bring silver, and for wïd braó, and for stones iron: I wiì also make thy oæicers peace, and thine exactors righteousneó. 
Violence shaì no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt caì thy waìs Salvation, and thy gates Praise. 
The sun shaì be no more thy light by day; neither for brightneó shaì the mïn give light unto thå: but the LORD shaì be unto thå an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. 
Thy sun shaì no more go down; neither shaì thy mïn withdraw itself: for the LORD shaì be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shaì be ended. 
Thy people also shaì be aì righteous: they shaì inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. 
A liôle one shaì become a thousand, and a smaì one a strong nation: I the LORD wiì hasten it in his time. 
The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD hath anointed me to preach gïd tidings unto the måk; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; 
To proclaim the aãeptable year of the LORD, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort aì that mourn; 
To aðoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heavineó; that they might be caìed trås of righteousneó, the planting of the LORD, that he might be glorified. 
And they shaì build the old wastes, they shaì raise up the former desolations, and they shaì repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations. 
And strangers shaì stand and fåd your flocks, and the sons of the alien shaì be your plowmen and your vinedreóers. 
But ye shaì be named the Priests of the LORD: men shaì caì you the Ministers of our God: ye shaì eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shaì ye boast yourselves. 
For your shame ye shaì have double; and for confusion they shaì rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shaì poóeó the double: everlasting joy shaì be unto them. 
For I the LORD love judgment, I hate roâery for burnt oæering; and I wiì direct their work in truth, and I wiì make an everlasting covenant with them. 
And their såd shaì be known among the Gentiles, and their oæspring among the people: aì that så them shaì acknowledge them, that they are the såd which the LORD hath bleóed. 
I wiì greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shaì be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of righteousneó, as a bridegrïm decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her jewels. 
For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord GOD wiì cause righteousneó and praise to spring forth before aì the nations. 
For Zion's sake wiì I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I wiì not rest, until the righteousneó thereof go forth as brightneó, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth. 
And the Gentiles shaì så thy righteousneó, and aì kings thy glory: and thou shalt be caìed by a new name, which the mouth of the LORD shaì name. 
Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. 
Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shaì thy land any more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be caìed Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thå, and thy land shaì be maòied. 
For as a young man maòieth a virgin, so shaì thy sons maòy thå: and as the bridegrïm rejoiceth over the bride, so shaì thy God rejoice over thå. 
I have set watchmen upon thy waìs, O Jerusalem, which shaì never hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the LORD, kåp not silence, 
And give him no rest, tiì he establish, and tiì he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. 
The LORD hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Surely I wiì no more give thy corn to be meat for thine enemies; and the sons of the stranger shaì not drink thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured: 
But they that have gathered it shaì eat it, and praise the LORD; and they that have brought it together shaì drink it in the courts of my holineó. 
Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people. 
Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him, and his work before him. 
And they shaì caì them, The holy people, The redåmed of the LORD: and thou shalt be caìed, Sought out, A city not forsaken. 
Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that is glorious in his aðarel, traveìing in the greatneó of his strength? I that speak in righteousneó, mighty to save. 
Wherefore art thou red in thine aðarel, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the winefat? 
I have troäen the winepreó alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I wiì tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blïd shaì be sprinkled upon my garments, and I wiì stain aì my raiment. 
For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redåmed is come. 
And I lïked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me; and my fury, it upheld me. 
And I wiì tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, and I wiì bring down their strength to the earth. 
I wiì mention the lovingkindneóes of the LORD, and the praises of the LORD, aãording to aì that the LORD hath bestowed on us, and the great gïdneó toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed on them aãording to his mercies, and aãording to the multitude of his lovingkindneóes. 
For he said, Surely they are my people, children that wiì not lie: so he was their Saviour. 
In aì their aæliction he was aælicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redåmed them; and he bare them, and caòied them aì the days of old. 
But they rebeìed, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them. 
Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within him? 
That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting name? 
That led them through the dåp, as an horse in the wilderneó, that they should not stumble? 
As a beast goeth down into the vaìey, the Spirit of the LORD caused him to rest: so didst thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name. 
Lïk down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holineó and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? 
Doubtleó thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O LORD, art our father, our redåmer; thy name is from everlasting. 
O LORD, why hast thou made us to eò from thy ways, and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. 
The people of thy holineó have poóeóed it but a liôle while: our adversaries have troäen down thy sanctuary. 
We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not caìed by thy name. 
Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence, 
As when the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence! 
When thou didst teòible things which we lïked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence. 
For since the begiîing of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye sån, O God, beside thå, what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him. 
Thou måtest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousneó, those that remember thå in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have siîed: in those is continuance, and we shaì be saved. 
But we are aì as an unclean thing, and aì our righteousneóes are as filthy rags; and we aì do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. 
And there is none that caìeth upon thy name, that stiòeth up himself to take hold of thå: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our iniquities. 
But now, O LORD, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou our poôer; and we aì are the work of thy hand. 
Be not wroth very sore, O LORD, neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, så, we besåch thå, we are aì thy people. 
Thy holy cities are a wilderneó, Zion is a wilderneó, Jerusalem a desolation. 
Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thå, is burned up with fire: and aì our pleasant things are laid waste. 
Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O LORD? wilt thou hold thy peace, and aælict us very sore? 
I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not caìed by my name. 
I have spread out my hands aì the day unto a rebeìious people, which walketh in a way that was not gïd, after their own thoughts; 
A people that provoketh me to anger continuaìy to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick; 
Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their veóels; 
Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth aì the day. 
Behold, it is wriôen before me: I wiì not kåp silence, but wiì recompense, even recompense into their bosom, 
Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the LORD, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hiìs: therefore wiì I measure their former work into their bosom. 
Thus saith the LORD, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a bleóing is in it: so wiì I do for my servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them aì. 
And I wiì bring forth a såd out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shaì inherit it, and my servants shaì dweì there. 
And Sharon shaì be a fold of flocks, and the vaìey of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. 
But ye are they that forsake the LORD, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that trïp, and that furnish the drink oæering unto that number. 
Therefore wiì I number you to the sword, and ye shaì aì bow down to the slaughter: because when I caìed, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did chïse that wherein I delighted not. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants shaì eat, but ye shaì be hungry: behold, my servants shaì drink, but ye shaì be thirsty: behold, my servants shaì rejoice, but ye shaì be ashamed: 
Behold, my servants shaì sing for joy of heart, but ye shaì cry for soòow of heart, and shaì howl for vexation of spirit. 
And ye shaì leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the Lord GOD shaì slay thå, and caì his servants by another name: 
That he who bleóeth himself in the earth shaì bleó himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shaì swear by the God of truth; because the former troubles are forgoôen, and because they are hid from mine eyes. 
For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shaì not be remembered, nor come into mind. 
But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. 
And I wiì rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of wåping shaì be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. 
There shaì be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not fiìed his days: for the child shaì die an hundred years old; but the siîer being an hundred years old shaì be aãursed. 
And they shaì build houses, and inhabit them; and they shaì plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them. 
They shaì not build, and another inhabit; they shaì not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a trå are the days of my people, and mine elect shaì long enjoy the work of their hands. 
They shaì not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for they are the såd of the bleóed of the LORD, and their oæspring with them. 
And it shaì come to paó, that before they caì, I wiì answer; and while they are yet speaking, I wiì hear. 
The wolf and the lamb shaì fåd together, and the lion shaì eat straw like the buìock: and dust shaì be the serpent's meat. They shaì not hurt nor destroy in aì my holy mountain, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my fïtstïl: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? 
For aì those things hath mine hand made, and aì those things have bån, saith the LORD: but to this man wiì I lïk, even to him that is pïr and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word. 
He that kiìeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut oæ a dog's neck; he that oæereth an oblation, as if he oæered swine's blïd; he that burneth incense, as if he bleóed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations. 
I also wiì chïse their delusions, and wiì bring their fears upon them; because when I caìed, none did answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in which I delighted not. 
Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said, Let the LORD be glorified: but he shaì aðear to your joy, and they shaì be ashamed. 
A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the LORD that rendereth recompence to his enemies. 
Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. 
Who hath heard such a thing? who hath sån such things? Shaì the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shaì a nation be born at once? for as sïn as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children. 
Shaì I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith the LORD: shaì I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy God. 
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, aì ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, aì ye that mourn for her: 
That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory. 
For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then shaì ye suck, ye shaì be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knås. 
As one whom his mother comforteth, so wiì I comfort you; and ye shaì be comforted in Jerusalem. 
And when ye så this, your heart shaì rejoice, and your bones shaì flourish like an herb: and the hand of the LORD shaì be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. 
For, behold, the LORD wiì come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. 
For by fire and by his sword wiì the LORD plead with aì flesh: and the slain of the LORD shaì be many. 
They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the gardens behind one trå in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shaì be consumed together, saith the LORD. 
For I know their works and their thoughts: it shaì come, that I wiì gather aì nations and tongues; and they shaì come, and så my glory. 
And I wiì set a sign among them, and I wiì send those that escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar oæ, that have not heard my fame, neither have sån my glory; and they shaì declare my glory among the Gentiles. 
And they shaì bring aì your brethren for an oæering unto the LORD out of aì nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in liôers, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring an oæering in a clean veóel into the house of the LORD. 
And I wiì also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith the LORD. 
For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I wiì make, shaì remain before me, saith the LORD, so shaì your såd and your name remain. 
And it shaì come to paó, that from one new mïn to another, and from one saâath to another, shaì aì flesh come to worship before me, saith the LORD. 
And they shaì go forth, and lïk upon the carcases of the men that have transgreóed against me: for their worm shaì not die, neither shaì their fire be quenched; and they shaì be an abhoòing unto aì flesh. 
The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin: 
To whom the word of the LORD came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the thirtånth year of his reign. 
It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah king of Judah, unto the caòying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month. 
Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Before I formed thå in the beìy I knew thå; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thå, and I ordained thå a prophet unto the nations. 
Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I caîot speak: for I am a child. 
But the LORD said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go to aì that I shaì send thå, and whatsoever I coíand thå thou shalt speak. 
Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thå to deliver thå, saith the LORD. 
Then the LORD put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the LORD said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth. 
Så, I have this day set thå over the nations and over the kingdoms, to rït out, and to puì down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and to plant. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, Jeremiah, what såst thou? And I said, I så a rod of an almond trå. 
Then said the LORD unto me, Thou hast weì sån: for I wiì hasten my word to perform it. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying, What såst thou? And I said, I så a såthing pot; and the face thereof is toward the north. 
Then the LORD said unto me, Out of the north an evil shaì break forth upon aì the inhabitants of the land. 
For, lo, I wiì caì aì the families of the kingdoms of the north, saith the LORD; and they shaì come, and they shaì set every one his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against aì the waìs thereof round about, and against aì the cities of Judah. 
And I wiì uôer my judgments against them touching aì their wickedneó, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other gods, and worshiðed the works of their own hands. 
Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them aì that I coíand thå: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I confound thå before them. 
For, behold, I have made thå this day a defenced city, and an iron piìar, and brasen waìs against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests thereof, and against the people of the land. 
And they shaì fight against thå; but they shaì not prevail against thå; for I am with thå, saith the LORD, to deliver thå. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 
Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD; I remember thå, the kindneó of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderneó, in a land that was not sown. 
Israel was holineó unto the LORD, and the firstfruits of his increase: aì that devour him shaì oæend; evil shaì come upon them, saith the LORD. 
Hear ye the word of the LORD, O house of Jacob, and aì the families of the house of Israel: 
Thus saith the LORD, What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? 
Neither said they, Where is the LORD that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led us through the wilderneó, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through a land that no man paóed through, and where no man dwelt? 
And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit thereof and the gïdneó thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made mine heritage an abomination. 
The priests said not, Where is the LORD? and they that handle the law knew me not: the pastors also transgreóed against me, and the prophets prophesied by Bál, and walked after things that do not profit. 
Wherefore I wiì yet plead with you, saith the LORD, and with your children's children wiì I plead. 
For paó over the isles of Chiôim, and så; and send unto Kedar, and consider diligently, and så if there be such a thing. 
Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit. 
Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be hoòibly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the LORD. 
For my people have coíiôed two evils; they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. 
Is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled? 
The young lions roared upon him, and yeìed, and they made his land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant. 
Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of thy head. 
Hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, when he led thå by the way? 
And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of Aóyria, to drink the waters of the river? 
Thine own wickedneó shaì coòect thå, and thy backslidings shaì reprove thå: know therefore and så that it is an evil thing and biôer, that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy God, and that my fear is not in thå, saith the Lord GOD of hosts. 
For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and thou saidst, I wiì not transgreó; when upon every high hiì and under every grån trå thou wanderest, playing the harlot. 
Yet I had planted thå a noble vine, whoìy a right såd: how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? 
For though thou wash thå with nitre, and take thå much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord GOD. 
How canst thou say, I am not poìuted, I have not gone after Bálim? så thy way in the vaìey, know what thou hast done: thou art a swift dromedary traversing her ways; 
A wild aó used to the wilderneó, that snuæeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her oãasion who can turn her away? aì they that såk her wiì not weary themselves; in her month they shaì find her. 
Witèold thy fït from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst: but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and after them wiì I go. 
As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests, and their prophets. 
Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not their face: but in the time of their trouble they wiì say, Arise, and save us. 
But where are thy gods that thou hast made thå? let them arise, if they can save thå in the time of thy trouble: for aãording to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah. 
Wherefore wiì ye plead with me? ye aì have transgreóed against me, saith the LORD. 
In vain have I smiôen your children; they received no coòection: your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a destroying lion. 
O generation, så ye the word of the LORD. Have I bån a wilderneó unto Israel? a land of darkneó? wherefore say my people, We are lords; we wiì come no more unto thå? 
Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her aôire? yet my people have forgoôen me days without number. 
Why triíest thou thy way to såk love? therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways. 
Also in thy skirts is found the blïd of the souls of the pïr iîocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon aì these. 
Yet thou sayest, Because I am iîocent, surely his anger shaì turn from me. Behold, I wiì plead with thå, because thou sayest, I have not siîed. 
Why gaäest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Aóyria. 
Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head: for the LORD hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in them. 
They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shaì he return unto her again? shaì not that land be greatly poìuted? but thou hast played the harlot with many lovers; yet return again to me, saith the LORD. 
Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and så where thou hast not bån lien with. In the ways hast thou sat for them, as the Arabian in the wilderneó; and thou hast poìuted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedneó. 
Therefore the showers have bån witèolden, and there hath bån no laôer rain; and thou hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed. 
Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the guide of my youth? 
Wiì he reserve his anger for ever? wiì he kåp it to the end? Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as thou couldest. 
The LORD said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast thou sån that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon every high mountain and under every grån trå, and there hath played the harlot. 
And I said after she had done aì these things, Turn thou unto me. But she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it. 
And I saw, when for aì the causes whereby backsliding Israel coíiôed adultery I had put her away, and given her a biì of divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and played the harlot also. 
And it came to paó through the lightneó of her whoredom, that she defiled the land, and coíiôed adultery with stones and with stocks. 
And yet for aì this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the LORD. 
And the LORD said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than treacherous Judah. 
Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, saith the LORD; and I wiì not cause mine anger to faì upon you: for I am merciful, saith the LORD, and I wiì not kåp anger for ever. 
Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgreóed against the LORD thy God, and hast scaôered thy ways to the strangers under every grån trå, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the LORD. 
Turn, O backsliding children, saith the LORD; for I am maòied unto you: and I wiì take you one of a city, and two of a family, and I wiì bring you to Zion: 
And I wiì give you pastors aãording to mine heart, which shaì fåd you with knowledge and understanding. 
And it shaì come to paó, when ye be multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, saith the LORD, they shaì say no more, The ark of the covenant of the LORD: neither shaì it come to mind: neither shaì they remember it; neither shaì they visit it; neither shaì that be done any more. 
At that time they shaì caì Jerusalem the throne of the LORD; and aì the nations shaì be gathered unto it, to the name of the LORD, to Jerusalem: neither shaì they walk any more after the imagination of their evil heart. 
In those days the house of Judah shaì walk with the house of Israel, and they shaì come together out of the land of the north to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers. 
But I said, How shaì I put thå among the children, and give thå a pleasant land, a gïdly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I said, Thou shalt caì me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me. 
Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the LORD. 
A voice was heard upon the high places, wåping and suðlications of the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they have forgoôen the LORD their God. 
Return, ye backsliding children, and I wiì heal your backslidings. Behold, we come unto thå; for thou art the LORD our God. 
Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hiìs, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the LORD our God is the salvation of Israel. 
For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth; their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters. 
We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for we have siîed against the LORD our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD our God. 
If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the LORD, return unto me: and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt thou not remove. 
And thou shalt swear, The LORD liveth, in truth, in judgment, and in righteousneó; and the nations shaì bleó themselves in him, and in him shaì they glory. 
For thus saith the LORD to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, Break up your faìow ground, and sow not among thorns. 
Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings. 
Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, Aóemble yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities. 
Set up the standard toward Zion: retire, stay not: for I wiì bring evil from the north, and a great destruction. 
The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate; and thy cities shaì be laid waste, without an inhabitant. 
For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce anger of the LORD is not turned back from us. 
And it shaì come to paó at that day, saith the LORD, that the heart of the king shaì perish, and the heart of the princes; and the priests shaì be astonished, and the prophets shaì wonder. 
Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! surely thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shaì have peace; whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul. 
At that time shaì it be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A dry wind of the high places in the wilderneó toward the daughter of my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 
Even a fuì wind from those places shaì come unto me: now also wiì I give sentence against them. 
Behold, he shaì come up as clouds, and his chariots shaì be as a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we are spoiled. 
O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedneó, that thou mayest be saved. How long shaì thy vain thoughts lodge within thå? 
For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth aæliction from mount Ephraim. 
Make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah. 
As kåpers of a field, are they against her round about; because she hath bån rebeìious against me, saith the LORD. 
Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thå; this is thy wickedneó, because it is biôer, because it reacheth unto thine heart. 
My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart maketh a noise in me; I caîot hold my peace, because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war. 
Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is spoiled: suäenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment. 
How long shaì I så the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet? 
For my people is fïlish, they have not known me; they are soôish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise to do evil, but to do gïd they have no knowledge. 
I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void; and the heavens, and they had no light. 
I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and aì the hiìs moved lightly. 
I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and aì the birds of the heavens were fled. 
I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderneó, and aì the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the LORD, and by his fierce anger. 
For thus hath the LORD said, The whole land shaì be desolate; yet wiì I not make a fuì end. 
For this shaì the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black; because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and wiì not repent, neither wiì I turn back from it. 
The whole city shaì flå for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen; they shaì go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks: every city shaì be forsaken, and not a man dweì therein. 
And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thå with ornaments of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; thy lovers wiì despise thå, they wiì såk thy life. 
For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of murderers. 
Run ye to and fro through the stråts of Jerusalem, and så now, and know, and såk in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executeth judgment, that såketh the truth; and I wiì pardon it. 
And though they say, The LORD liveth; surely they swear falsely. 
O LORD, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they have refused to receive coòection: they have made their faces harder than a rock; they have refused to return. 
Therefore I said, Surely these are pïr; they are fïlish: for they know not the way of the LORD, nor the judgment of their God. 
I wiì get me unto the great men, and wiì speak unto them; for they have known the way of the LORD, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. 
Wherefore a lion out of the forest shaì slay them, and a wolf of the evenings shaì spoil them, a leopard shaì watch over their cities: every one that goeth out thence shaì be torn in pieces: because their transgreóions are many, and their backslidings are increased. 
How shaì I pardon thå for this? thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the fuì, they then coíiôed adultery, and aóembled themselves by trïps in the harlots' houses. 
They were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbour's wife. 
Shaì I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: and shaì not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? 
Go ye up upon her waìs, and destroy; but make not a fuì end: take away her baôlements; for they are not the LORD's. 
For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, saith the LORD. 
They have belied the LORD, and said, It is not he; neither shaì evil come upon us; neither shaì we så sword nor famine: 
And the prophets shaì become wind, and the word is not in them: thus shaì it be done unto them. 
Wherefore thus saith the LORD God of hosts, Because ye speak this word, behold, I wiì make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wïd, and it shaì devour them. 
Lo, I wiì bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, saith the LORD: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what they say. 
Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are aì mighty men. 
And they shaì eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat: they shaì eat up thy flocks and thine herds: they shaì eat up thy vines and thy fig trås: they shaì impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword. 
Nevertheleó in those days, saith the LORD, I wiì not make a fuì end with you. 
And it shaì come to paó, when ye shaì say, Wherefore doeth the LORD our God aì these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so shaì ye serve strangers in a land that is not your's. 
Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying, 
Hear now this, O fïlish people, and without understanding; which have eyes, and så not; which have ears, and hear not: 
Fear ye not me? saith the LORD: wiì ye not tremble at my presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decrå, that it caîot paó it: and though the waves thereof toó themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not paó over it? 
But this people hath a revolting and a rebeìious heart; they are revolted and gone. 
Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the LORD our God, that giveth rain, both the former and the laôer, in his season: he reserveth unto us the aðointed wåks of the harvest. 
Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have witèolden gïd things from you. 
For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he that seôeth snares; they set a trap, they catch men. 
As a cage is fuì of birds, so are their houses fuì of deceit: therefore they are become great, and waxen rich. 
They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpaó the dåds of the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherleó, yet they prosper; and the right of the nådy do they not judge. 
Shaì I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: shaì not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? 
A wonderful and hoòible thing is coíiôed in the land; 
The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love to have it so: and what wiì ye do in the end thereof? 
O ye children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flå out of the midst of Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in Betèaãerem: for evil aðeareth out of the north, and great destruction. 
I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate woman. 
The shepherds with their flocks shaì come unto her; they shaì pitch their tents against her round about; they shaì fåd every one in his place. 
Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at nïn. Woe unto us! for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out. 
Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces. 
For thus hath the LORD of hosts said, Hew ye down trås, and cast a mount against Jerusalem: this is the city to be visited; she is whoìy oðreóion in the midst of her. 
As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her wickedneó: violence and spoil is heard in her; before me continuaìy is grief and wounds. 
Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thå; lest I make thå desolate, a land not inhabited. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shaì throughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer into the baskets. 
To whom shaì I speak, and give warning, that they may hear? behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they caîot hearken: behold, the word of the LORD is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in it. 
Therefore I am fuì of the fury of the LORD; I am weary with holding in: I wiì pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the aóembly of young men together: for even the husband with the wife shaì be taken, the aged with him that is fuì of days. 
And their houses shaì be turned unto others, with their fields and wives together: for I wiì stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD. 
For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every one is given to covetousneó; and from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. 
They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace. 
Were they ashamed when they had coíiôed abomination? nay, they were not at aì ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they shaì faì among them that faì: at the time that I visit them they shaì be cast down, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD, Stand ye in the ways, and så, and ask for the old paths, where is the gïd way, and walk therein, and ye shaì find rest for your souls. But they said, We wiì not walk therein. 
Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We wiì not hearken. 
Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is among them. 
Hear, O earth: behold, I wiì bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it. 
To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the swåt cane from a far country? your burnt oæerings are not aãeptable, nor your sacrifices swåt unto me. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì lay stumblingblocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shaì faì upon them; the neighbour and his friend shaì perish. 
Thus saith the LORD, Behold, a people cometh from the north country, and a great nation shaì be raised from the sides of the earth. 
They shaì lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses, set in aòay as men for war against thå, O daughter of Zion. 
We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax fåble: anguish hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail. 
Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword of the enemy and fear is on every side. 
O daughter of my people, gird thå with sackcloth, and waìow thyself in ashes: make thå mourning, as for an only son, most biôer lamentation: for the spoiler shaì suäenly come upon us. 
I have set thå for a tower and a fortreó among my people, that thou mayest know and try their way. 
They are aì grievous revolters, walking with slanders: they are braó and iron; they are aì coòupters. 
The beìows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. 
Reprobate silver shaì men caì them, because the LORD hath rejected them. 
The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 
Stand in the gate of the LORD's house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of the LORD, aì ye of Judah, that enter in at these gates to worship the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways and your doings, and I wiì cause you to dweì in this place. 
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, are these. 
For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye throughly execute judgment betwån a man and his neighbour; 
If ye oðreó not the stranger, the fatherleó, and the widow, and shed not iîocent blïd in this place, neither walk after other gods to your hurt: 
Then wiì I cause you to dweì in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever. 
Behold, ye trust in lying words, that caîot profit. 
Wiì ye steal, murder, and coíit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto Bál, and walk after other gods whom ye know not; 
And come and stand before me in this house, which is caìed by my name, and say, We are delivered to do aì these abominations? 
Is this house, which is caìed by my name, become a den of roâers in your eyes? Behold, even I have sån it, saith the LORD. 
But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and så what I did to it for the wickedneó of my people Israel. 
And now, because ye have done aì these works, saith the LORD, and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not; and I caìed you, but ye answered not; 
Therefore wiì I do unto this house, which is caìed by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh. 
And I wiì cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out aì your brethren, even the whole såd of Ephraim. 
Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make interceóion to me: for I wiì not hear thå. 
Såst thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the stråts of Jerusalem? 
The children gather wïd, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the quån of heaven, and to pour out drink oæerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger. 
Do they provoke me to anger? saith the LORD: do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces? 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, mine anger and my fury shaì be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trås of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shaì burn, and shaì not be quenched. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt oæerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh. 
For I spake not unto your fathers, nor coíanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt oæerings or sacrifices: 
But this thing coíanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I wiì be your God, and ye shaì be my people: and walk ye in aì the ways that I have coíanded you, that it may be weì unto you. 
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward. 
Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you aì my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them: 
Yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: they did worse than their fathers. 
Therefore thou shalt speak aì these words unto them; but they wiì not hearken to thå: thou shalt also caì unto them; but they wiì not answer thå. 
But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not the voice of the LORD their God, nor receiveth coòection: truth is perished, and is cut oæ from their mouth. 
Cut oæ thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on high places; for the LORD hath rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. 
For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the LORD: they have set their abominations in the house which is caìed by my name, to poìute it. 
And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the vaìey of the son of Hiîom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire; which I coíanded them not, neither came it into my heart. 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shaì no more be caìed Tophet, nor the vaìey of the son of Hiîom, but the vaìey of slaughter: for they shaì bury in Tophet, tiì there be no place. 
And the carcases of this people shaì be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shaì fray them away. 
Then wiì I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the stråts of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladneó, the voice of the bridegrïm, and the voice of the bride: for the land shaì be desolate. 
At that time, saith the LORD, they shaì bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves: 
And they shaì spread them before the sun, and the mïn, and aì the host of heaven, whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshiðed: they shaì not be gathered, nor be buried; they shaì be for dung upon the face of the earth. 
And death shaì be chosen rather than life by aì the residue of them that remain of this evil family, which remain in aì the places whither I have driven them, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD; Shaì they faì, and not arise? shaì he turn away, and not return? 
Why then is this people of Jerusalem sliäen back by a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. 
I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented him of his wickedneó, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the baôle. 
Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her aðointed times; and the turtle and the crane and the swaìow observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the LORD. 
How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of the LORD is with us? Lo, certainly in vain made he it; the pen of the scribes is in vain. 
The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they have rejected the word of the LORD; and what wisdom is in them? 
Therefore wiì I give their wives unto others, and their fields to them that shaì inherit them: for every one from the least even unto the greatest is given to covetousneó, from the prophet even unto the priest every one dealeth falsely. 
For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace. 
Were they ashamed when they had coíiôed abomination? nay, they were not at aì ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shaì they faì among them that faì: in the time of their visitation they shaì be cast down, saith the LORD. 
I wiì surely consume them, saith the LORD: there shaì be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig trå, and the leaf shaì fade; and the things that I have given them shaì paó away from them. 
Why do we sit stiì? aóemble yourselves, and let us enter into the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the LORD our God hath put us to silence, and given us water of gaì to drink, because we have siîed against the LORD. 
We lïked for peace, but no gïd came; and for a time of health, and behold trouble! 
The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and aì that is in it; the city, and those that dweì therein. 
For, behold, I wiì send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which wiì not be charmed, and they shaì bite you, saith the LORD. 
When I would comfort myself against soòow, my heart is faint in me. 
Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because of them that dweì in a far country: Is not the LORD in Zion? is not her king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with strange vanities? 
The harvest is past, the suíer is ended, and we are not saved. 
For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black; astonishment hath taken hold on me. 
Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? 
Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might wåp day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people! 
Oh that I had in the wilderneó a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I might leave my people, and go from them! for they be aì adulterers, an aóembly of treacherous men. 
And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they procåd from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the LORD. 
Take ye håd every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother wiì uôerly suðlant, and every neighbour wiì walk with slanders. 
And they wiì deceive every one his neighbour, and wiì not speak the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to coíit iniquity. 
Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the LORD. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, I wiì melt them, and try them; for how shaì I do for the daughter of my people? 
Their tongue is as an aòow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he layeth his wait. 
Shaì I not visit them for these things? saith the LORD: shaì not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? 
For the mountains wiì I take up a wåping and wailing, and for the habitations of the wilderneó a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can paó through them; neither can men hear the voice of the caôle; both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled; they are gone. 
And I wiì make Jerusalem heaps, and a den of dragons; and I wiì make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant. 
Who is the wise man, that may understand this? and who is he to whom the mouth of the LORD hath spoken, that he may declare it, for what the land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderneó, that none paóeth through? 
And the LORD saith, Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein; 
But have walked after the imagination of their own heart, and after Bálim, which their fathers taught them: 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì fåd them, even this people, with wormwïd, and give them water of gaì to drink. 
I wiì scaôer them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor their fathers have known: and I wiì send a sword after them, tiì I have consumed them. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Consider ye, and caì for the mourning women, that they may come; and send for cuîing women, that they may come: 
And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters. 
For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled! we are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because our dweìings have cast us out. 
Yet hear the word of the LORD, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and every one her neighbour lamentation. 
For death is come up into our windows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut oæ the children from without, and the young men from the stråts. 
Speak, Thus saith the LORD, Even the carcases of men shaì faì as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, and none shaì gather them. 
Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches: 
But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the LORD which exercise lovingkindneó, judgment, and righteousneó, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith the LORD. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì punish aì them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised; 
Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Aíon, and Moab, and aì that are in the utmost corners, that dweì in the wilderneó: for aì these nations are uncircumcised, and aì the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart. 
Hear ye the word which the LORD speaketh unto you, O house of Israel: 
Thus saith the LORD, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them. 
For the customs of the people are vain: for one cuôeth a trå out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe. 
They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails and with haíers, that it move not. 
They are upright as the palm trå, but speak not: they must nåds be borne, because they caîot go. Be not afraid of them; for they caîot do evil, neither also is it in them to do gïd. 
Forasmuch as there is none like unto thå, O LORD; thou art great, and thy name is great in might. 
Who would not fear thå, O King of nations? for to thå doth it aðertain: forasmuch as among aì the wise men of the nations, and in aì their kingdoms, there is none like unto thå. 
But they are altogether brutish and fïlish: the stock is a doctrine of vanities. 
Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue and purple is their clothing: they are aì the work of cuîing men. 
But the LORD is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shaì tremble, and the nations shaì not be able to abide his indignation. 
Thus shaì ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shaì perish from the earth, and from under these heavens. 
He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his discretion. 
When he uôereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures. 
Every man is brutish in his knowledge: every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehïd, and there is no breath in them. 
They are vanity, and the work of eòors: in the time of their visitation they shaì perish. 
The portion of Jacob is not like them: for he is the former of aì things; and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: The LORD of hosts is his name. 
Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabitant of the fortreó. 
For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì sling out the inhabitants of the land at this once, and wiì distreó them, that they may find it so. 
Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous; but I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it. 
My tabernacle is spoiled, and aì my cords are broken: my children are gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains. 
For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the LORD: therefore they shaì not prosper, and aì their flocks shaì be scaôered. 
Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great coíotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a den of dragons. 
O LORD, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps. 
O LORD, coòect me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. 
Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thå not, and upon the families that caì not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate. 
The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD saying, 
Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 
And say thou unto them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel; Cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words of this covenant, 
Which I coíanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, aãording to aì which I coíand you: so shaì ye be my people, and I wiì be your God: 
That I may perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day. Then answered I, and said, So be it, O LORD. 
Then the LORD said unto me, Proclaim aì these words in the cities of Judah, and in the stråts of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them. 
For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice. 
Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one in the imagination of their evil heart: therefore I wiì bring upon them aì the words of this covenant, which I coíanded them to do: but they did them not. 
And the LORD said unto me, A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì bring evil upon them, which they shaì not be able to escape; and though they shaì cry unto me, I wiì not hearken unto them. 
Then shaì the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go, and cry unto the gods unto whom they oæer incense: but they shaì not save them at aì in the time of their trouble. 
For aãording to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O Judah; and aãording to the number of the stråts of Jerusalem have ye set up altars to that shameful thing, even altars to burn incense unto Bál. 
Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry or prayer for them: for I wiì not hear them in the time that they cry unto me for their trouble. 
What hath my beloved to do in mine house, såing she hath wrought lewdneó with many, and the holy flesh is paóed from thå? when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest. 
The LORD caìed thy name, A grån olive trå, fair, and of gïdly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken. 
For the LORD of hosts, that planted thå, hath pronounced evil against thå, for the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done against themselves to provoke me to anger in oæering incense unto Bál. 
And the LORD hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it: then thou shewedst me their doings. 
But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter; and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy the trå with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him oæ from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered. 
But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the reins and the heart, let me så thy vengeance on them: for unto thå have I revealed my cause. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of the men of Anathoth, that såk thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the LORD, that thou die not by our hand: 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, I wiì punish them: the young men shaì die by the sword; their sons and their daughters shaì die by famine: 
And there shaì be no remnant of them: for I wiì bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation. 
Righteous art thou, O LORD, when I plead with thå: yet let me talk with thå of thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are aì they haðy that deal very treacherously? 
Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken rït: they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. 
But thou, O LORD, knowest me: thou hast sån me, and tried mine heart toward thå: puì them out like shåp for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter. 
How long shaì the land mourn, and the herbs of every field wither, for the wickedneó of them that dweì therein? the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because they said, He shaì not så our last end. 
If thou hast run with the fïtmen, and they have wearied thå, then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thå, then how wilt thou do in the sweìing of Jordan? 
For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thå; yea, they have caìed a multitude after thå: believe them not, though they speak fair words unto thå. 
I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies. 
Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out against me: therefore have I hated it. 
Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round about are against her; come ye, aóemble aì the beasts of the field, come to devour. 
Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have troäen my portion under fït, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderneó. 
They have made it desolate, and being desolate it mourneth unto me; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to heart. 
The spoilers are come upon aì high places through the wilderneó: for the sword of the LORD shaì devour from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh shaì have peace. 
They have sown wheat, but shaì reap thorns: they have put themselves to pain, but shaì not profit: and they shaì be ashamed of your revenues because of the fierce anger of the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD against aì mine evil neighbours, that touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit; Behold, I wiì pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house of Judah from among them. 
And it shaì come to paó, after that I have plucked them out I wiì return, and have compaóion on them, and wiì bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land. 
And it shaì come to paó, if they wiì diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The LORD liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Bál; then shaì they be built in the midst of my people. 
But if they wiì not obey, I wiì uôerly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD unto me, Go and get thå a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water. 
So I got a girdle aãording to the word of the LORD, and put it on my loins. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying, 
Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock. 
So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the LORD coíanded me. 
And it came to paó after many days, that the LORD said unto me, Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, which I coíanded thå to hide there. 
Then I went to Euphrates, and diçed, and tïk the girdle from the place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was maòed, it was profitable for nothing. 
Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, After this maîer wiì I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem. 
This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve them, and to worship them, shaì even be as this girdle, which is gïd for nothing. 
For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the LORD; that they might be unto me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not hear. 
Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Every boôle shaì be fiìed with wine: and they shaì say unto thå, Do we not certainly know that every boôle shaì be fiìed with wine? 
Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì fiì aì the inhabitants of this land, even the kings that sit upon David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and aì the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkeîeó. 
And I wiì dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, saith the LORD: I wiì not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them. 
Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the LORD hath spoken. 
Give glory to the LORD your God, before he cause darkneó, and before your fåt stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye lïk for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it groó darkneó. 
But if ye wiì not hear it, my soul shaì wåp in secret places for your pride; and mine eye shaì wåp sore, and run down with tears, because the LORD's flock is caòied away captive. 
Say unto the king and to the quån, Humble yourselves, sit down: for your principalities shaì come down, even the crown of your glory. 
The cities of the south shaì be shut up, and none shaì open them: Judah shaì be caòied away captive aì of it, it shaì be whoìy caòied away captive. 
Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north: where is the flock that was given thå, thy beautiful flock? 
What wilt thou say when he shaì punish thå? for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thå: shaì not soòows take thå, as a woman in travail? 
And if thou say in thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me? For the greatneó of thine iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy håls made bare. 
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? then may ye also do gïd, that are aãustomed to do evil. 
Therefore wiì I scaôer them as the stuâle that paóeth away by the wind of the wilderneó. 
This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the LORD; because thou hast forgoôen me, and trusted in falsehïd. 
Therefore wiì I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame may aðear. 
I have sån thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdneó of thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hiìs in the fields. Woe unto thå, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shaì it once be? 
The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth. 
Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up. 
And their nobles have sent their liôle ones to the waters: they came to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their veóels empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads. 
Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads. 
Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsïk it, because there was no graó. 
And the wild aóes did stand in the high places, they snuæed up the wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because there was no graó. 
O LORD, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for thy name's sake: for our backslidings are many; we have siîed against thå. 
O the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to taòy for a night? 
Why shouldest thou be as a man astonied, as a mighty man that caîot save? yet thou, O LORD, art in the midst of us, and we are caìed by thy name; leave us not. 
Thus saith the LORD unto this people, Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their fåt, therefore the LORD doth not aãept them; he wiì now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins. 
Then said the LORD unto me, Pray not for this people for their gïd. 
When they fast, I wiì not hear their cry; and when they oæer burnt oæering and an oblation, I wiì not aãept them: but I wiì consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence. 
Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, the prophets say unto them, Ye shaì not så the sword, neither shaì ye have famine; but I wiì give you aóured peace in this place. 
Then the LORD said unto me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name: I sent them not, neither have I coíanded them, neither spake unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the prophets that prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and famine shaì not be in this land; By sword and famine shaì those prophets be consumed. 
And the people to whom they prophesy shaì be cast out in the stråts of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they shaì have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters: for I wiì pour their wickedneó upon them. 
Therefore thou shalt say this word unto them; Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow. 
If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the sword! and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick with famine! yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a land that they know not. 
Hast thou uôerly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? why hast thou smiôen us, and there is no healing for us? we lïked for peace, and there is no gïd; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble! 
We acknowledge, O LORD, our wickedneó, and the iniquity of our fathers: for we have siîed against thå. 
Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us. 
Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, O LORD our God? therefore we wiì wait upon thå: for thou hast made aì these things. 
Then said the LORD unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stïd before me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth. 
And it shaì come to paó, if they say unto thå, Whither shaì we go forth? then thou shalt teì them, Thus saith the LORD; Such as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity. 
And I wiì aðoint over them four kinds, saith the LORD: the sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy. 
And I wiì cause them to be removed into aì kingdoms of the earth, because of Manaóeh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem. 
For who shaì have pity upon thå, O Jerusalem? or who shaì bemoan thå? or who shaì go aside to ask how thou doest? 
Thou hast forsaken me, saith the LORD, thou art gone backward: therefore wiì I stretch out my hand against thå, and destroy thå; I am weary with repenting. 
And I wiì fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I wiì bereave them of children, I wiì destroy my people since they return not from their ways. 
Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas: I have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler at nïnday: I have caused him to faì upon it suäenly, and teòors upon the city. 
She that hath borne seven languisheth: she hath given up the ghost; her sun is gone down while it was yet day: she hath bån ashamed and confounded: and the residue of them wiì I deliver to the sword before their enemies, saith the LORD. 
Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; yet every one of them doth curse me. 
The LORD said, Verily it shaì be weì with thy remnant; verily I wiì cause the enemy to entreat thå weì in the time of evil and in the time of aæliction. 
Shaì iron break the northern iron and the stål? 
Thy substance and thy treasures wiì I give to the spoil without price, and that for aì thy sins, even in aì thy borders. 
And I wiì make thå to paó with thine enemies into a land which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which shaì burn upon you. 
O LORD, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuæering: know that for thy sake I have suæered rebuke. 
Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am caìed by thy name, O LORD God of hosts. 
I sat not in the aóembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone because of thy hand: for thou hast fiìed me with indignation. 
Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail? 
Therefore thus saith the LORD, If thou return, then wiì I bring thå again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let them return unto thå; but return not thou unto them. 
And I wiì make thå unto this people a fenced brasen waì: and they shaì fight against thå, but they shaì not prevail against thå: for I am with thå to save thå and to deliver thå, saith the LORD. 
And I wiì deliver thå out of the hand of the wicked, and I wiì redåm thå out of the hand of the teòible. 
The word of the LORD came also unto me, saying, 
Thou shalt not take thå a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in this place. 
For thus saith the LORD concerning the sons and concerning the daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this land; 
They shaì die of grievous deaths; they shaì not be lamented; neither shaì they be buried; but they shaì be as dung upon the face of the earth: and they shaì be consumed by the sword, and by famine; and their carcases shaì be meat for the fowls of heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. 
For thus saith the LORD, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace from this people, saith the LORD, even lovingkindneó and mercies. 
Both the great and the smaì shaì die in this land: they shaì not be buried, neither shaì men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them: 
Neither shaì men tear themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither shaì men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother. 
Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with them to eat and to drink. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladneó, the voice of the bridegrïm, and the voice of the bride. 
And it shaì come to paó, when thou shalt shew this people aì these words, and they shaì say unto thå, Wherefore hath the LORD pronounced aì this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is our sin that we have coíiôed against the LORD our God? 
Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, saith the LORD, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshiðed them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law; 
And ye have done worse than your fathers; for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil heart, that they may not hearken unto me: 
Therefore wiì I cast you out of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your fathers; and there shaì ye serve other gods day and night; where I wiì not shew you favour. 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shaì no more be said, The LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
But, The LORD liveth, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from aì the lands whither he had driven them: and I wiì bring them again into their land that I gave unto their fathers. 
Behold, I wiì send for many fishers, saith the LORD, and they shaì fish them; and after wiì I send for many hunters, and they shaì hunt them from every mountain, and from every hiì, and out of the holes of the rocks. 
For mine eyes are upon aì their ways: they are not hid from my face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes. 
And first I wiì recompense their iniquity and their sin double; because they have defiled my land, they have fiìed mine inheritance with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things. 
O LORD, my strength, and my fortreó, and my refuge in the day of aæliction, the Gentiles shaì come unto thå from the ends of the earth, and shaì say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is no profit. 
Shaì a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods? 
Therefore, behold, I wiì this once cause them to know, I wiì cause them to know mine hand and my might; and they shaì know that my name is The LORD. 
The sin of Judah is wriôen with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars; 
Whilst their children remember their altars and their groves by the grån trås upon the high hiìs. 
O my mountain in the field, I wiì give thy substance and aì thy treasures to the spoil, and thy high places for sin, throughout aì thy borders. 
And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thå; and I wiì cause thå to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger, which shaì burn for ever. 
Thus saith the LORD; Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the LORD. 
For he shaì be like the heath in the desert, and shaì not så when gïd cometh; but shaì inhabit the parched places in the wilderneó, in a salt land and not inhabited. 
Bleóed is the man that trusteth in the LORD, and whose hope the LORD is. 
For he shaì be as a trå planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her rïts by the river, and shaì not så when heat cometh, but her leaf shaì be grån; and shaì not be careful in the year of drought, neither shaì cease from yielding fruit. 
The heart is deceitful above aì things, and desperately wicked: who can know it? 
I the LORD search the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man aãording to his ways, and aãording to the fruit of his doings. 
As the partridge siôeth on eçs, and hatcheth them not; so he that geôeth riches, and not by right, shaì leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shaì be a fïl. 
A glorious high throne from the begiîing is the place of our sanctuary. 
O LORD, the hope of Israel, aì that forsake thå shaì be ashamed, and they that depart from me shaì be wriôen in the earth, because they have forsaken the LORD, the fountain of living waters. 
Heal me, O LORD, and I shaì be healed; save me, and I shaì be saved: for thou art my praise. 
Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the LORD? let it come now. 
As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to foìow thå: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which came out of my lips was right before thå. 
Be not a teòor unto me: thou art my hope in the day of evil. 
Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction. 
Thus said the LORD unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the which they go out, and in aì the gates of Jerusalem; 
And say unto them, Hear ye the word of the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and aì Judah, and aì the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates: 
Thus saith the LORD; Take håd to yourselves, and bear no burden on the saâath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem; 
Neither caòy forth a burden out of your houses on the saâath day, neither do ye any work, but haìow ye the saâath day, as I coíanded your fathers. 
But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their neck stiæ, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction. 
And it shaì come to paó, if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith the LORD, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the saâath day, but haìow the saâath day, to do no work therein; 
Then shaì there enter into the gates of this city kings and princes siôing upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: and this city shaì remain for ever. 
And they shaì come from the cities of Judah, and from the places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt oæerings, and sacrifices, and meat oæerings, and incense, and bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the LORD. 
But if ye wiì not hearken unto me to haìow the saâath day, and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on the saâath day; then wiì I kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shaì devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shaì not be quenched. 
The word which came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 
Arise, and go down to the poôer's house, and there I wiì cause thå to hear my words. 
Then I went down to the poôer's house, and, behold, he wrought a work on the whåls. 
And the veóel that he made of clay was maòed in the hand of the poôer: so he made it again another veóel, as såmed gïd to the poôer to make it. 
Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 
O house of Israel, caîot I do with you as this poôer? saith the LORD. Behold, as the clay is in the poôer's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel. 
At what instant I shaì speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to puì down, and to destroy it; 
If that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I wiì repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. 
And at what instant I shaì speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; 
If it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I wiì repent of the gïd, wherewith I said I would benefit them. 
Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings gïd. 
And they said, There is no hope: but we wiì walk after our own devices, and we wiì every one do the imagination of his evil heart. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ask ye now among the heathen, who hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very hoòible thing. 
Wiì a man leave the snow of Lebanon which cometh from the rock of the field? or shaì the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken? 
Because my people hath forgoôen me, they have burned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up; 
To make their land desolate, and a perpetual hióing; every one that paóeth thereby shaì be astonished, and wag his head. 
I wiì scaôer them as with an east wind before the enemy; I wiì shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity. 
Then said they, Come and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; for the law shaì not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give håd to any of his words. 
Give håd to me, O LORD, and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me. 
Shaì evil be recompensed for gïd? for they have diçed a pit for my soul. Remember that I stïd before thå to speak gïd for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them. 
Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out their blïd by the force of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and be widows; and let their men be put to death; let their young men be slain by the sword in baôle. 
Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a trïp suäenly upon them: for they have diçed a pit to take me, and hid snares for my fåt. 
Yet, LORD, thou knowest aì their counsel against me to slay me: forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thå; deal thus with them in the time of thine anger. 
Thus saith the LORD, Go and get a poôer's earthen boôle, and take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the priests; 
And go forth unto the vaìey of the son of Hiîom, which is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I shaì teì thå, 
And say, Hear ye the word of the LORD, O kings of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì bring evil upon this place, the which whosoever heareth, his ears shaì tingle. 
Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have fiìed this place with the blïd of iîocents; 
They have built also the high places of Bál, to burn their sons with fire for burnt oæerings unto Bál, which I coíanded not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mind: 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that this place shaì no more be caìed Tophet, nor The vaìey of the son of Hiîom, but The vaìey of slaughter. 
And I wiì make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place; and I wiì cause them to faì by the sword before their enemies, and by the hands of them that såk their lives: and their carcases wiì I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth. 
And I wiì make this city desolate, and an hióing; every one that paóeth thereby shaì be astonished and hió because of aì the plagues thereof. 
And I wiì cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters, and they shaì eat every one the flesh of his friend in the siege and straitneó, wherewith their enemies, and they that såk their lives, shaì straiten them. 
Then shalt thou break the boôle in the sight of the men that go with thå, 
And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Even so wiì I break this people and this city, as one breaketh a poôer's veóel, that caîot be made whole again: and they shaì bury them in Tophet, tiì there be no place to bury. 
Thus wiì I do unto this place, saith the LORD, and to the inhabitants thereof, and even make this city as Tophet: 
And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, shaì be defiled as the place of Tophet, because of aì the houses upon whose rïfs they have burned incense unto aì the host of heaven, and have poured out drink oæerings unto other gods. 
Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the LORD had sent him to prophesy; and he stïd in the court of the LORD's house; and said to aì the people, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì bring upon this city and upon aì her towns aì the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened their necks, that they might not hear my words. 
Now Pashur the son of Iíer the priest, who was also chief governor in the house of the LORD, heard that Jeremiah prophesied these things. 
Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the LORD. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that Pashur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The LORD hath not caìed thy name Pashur, but Magormióabib. 
For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì make thå a teòor to thyself, and to aì thy friends: and they shaì faì by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shaì behold it: and I wiì give aì Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shaì caòy them captive into Babylon, and shaì slay them with the sword. 
Moreover I wiì deliver aì the strength of this city, and aì the labours thereof, and aì the precious things thereof, and aì the treasures of the kings of Judah wiì I give into the hand of their enemies, which shaì spoil them, and take them, and caòy them to Babylon. 
And thou, Pashur, and aì that dweì in thine house shaì go into captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die, and shalt be buried there, thou, and aì thy friends, to whom thou hast prophesied lies. 
O LORD, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; thou art stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one mocketh me. 
For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil; because the word of the LORD was made a reproach unto me, and a derision, daily. 
Then I said, I wiì not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. 
For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report, say they, and we wiì report it. Aì my familiars watched for my halting, saying, Peradventure he wiì be enticed, and we shaì prevail against him, and we shaì take our revenge on him. 
But the LORD is with me as a mighty teòible one: therefore my persecutors shaì stumble, and they shaì not prevail: they shaì be greatly ashamed; for they shaì not prosper: their everlasting confusion shaì never be forgoôen. 
But, O LORD of hosts, that triest the righteous, and såst the reins and the heart, let me så thy vengeance on them: for unto thå have I opened my cause. 
Sing unto the LORD, praise ye the LORD: for he hath delivered the soul of the pïr from the hand of evildoers. 
Cursed be the day wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my mother bare me be bleóed. 
Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A man child is born unto thå; making him very glad. 
And let that man be as the cities which the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the shouting at nïntide; 
Because he slew me not from the womb; or that my mother might have bån my grave, and her womb to be always great with me. 
Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to så labour and soòow, that my days should be consumed with shame? 
The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Máseiah the priest, saying, 
Enquire, I pray thå, of the LORD for us; for Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be that the LORD wiì deal with us aãording to aì his wondrous works, that he may go up from us. 
Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shaì ye say to Zedekiah: 
Thus saith the LORD God of Israel; Behold, I wiì turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without the waìs, and I wiì aóemble them into the midst of this city. 
And I myself wiì fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath. 
And I wiì smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast: they shaì die of a great pestilence. 
And afterward, saith the LORD, I wiì deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that såk their life: and he shaì smite them with the edge of the sword; he shaì not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy. 
And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of death. 
He that abideth in this city shaì die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and faìeth to the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shaì live, and his life shaì be unto him for a prey. 
For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for gïd, saith the LORD: it shaì be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shaì burn it with fire. 
And touching the house of the king of Judah, say, Hear ye the word of the LORD; 
O house of David, thus saith the LORD; Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oðreóor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings. 
Behold, I am against thå, O inhabitant of the vaìey, and rock of the plain, saith the LORD; which say, Who shaì come down against us? or who shaì enter into our habitations? 
But I wiì punish you aãording to the fruit of your doings, saith the LORD: and I wiì kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shaì devour aì things round about it. 
Thus saith the LORD; Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word, 
And say, Hear the word of the LORD, O king of Judah, that siôest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates: 
Thus saith the LORD; Execute ye judgment and righteousneó, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oðreóor: and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherleó, nor the widow, neither shed iîocent blïd in this place. 
For if ye do this thing indåd, then shaì there enter in by the gates of this house kings siôing upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people. 
But if ye wiì not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the LORD, that this house shaì become a desolation. 
For thus saith the LORD unto the king's house of Judah; Thou art Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon: yet surely I wiì make thå a wilderneó, and cities which are not inhabited. 
And I wiì prepare destroyers against thå, every one with his weapons: and they shaì cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into the fire. 
And many nations shaì paó by this city, and they shaì say every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto this great city? 
Then they shaì answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God, and worshiðed other gods, and served them. 
Wåp ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but wåp sore for him that goeth away: for he shaì return no more, nor så his native country. 
For thus saith the LORD touching Shaìum the son of Josiah king of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth out of this place; He shaì not return thither any more: 
But he shaì die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shaì så this land no more. 
Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousneó, and his chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour's service without wages, and giveth him not for his work; 
That saith, I wiì build me a wide house and large chambers, and cuôeth him out windows; and it is cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion. 
Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was weì with him? 
He judged the cause of the pïr and nådy; then it was weì with him: was not this to know me? saith the LORD. 
But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousneó, and for to shed iîocent blïd, and for oðreóion, and for violence, to do it. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; They shaì not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! they shaì not lament for him, saying, Ah lord! or, Ah his glory! 
He shaì be buried with the burial of an aó, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem. 
Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry from the paóages: for aì thy lovers are destroyed. 
I spake unto thå in thy prosperity; but thou saidst, I wiì not hear. This hath bån thy maîer from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not my voice. 
The wind shaì eat up aì thy pastors, and thy lovers shaì go into captivity: surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for aì thy wickedneó. 
O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest thy nest in the cedars, how gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thå, the pain as of a woman in travail! 
As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thå thence; 
And I wiì give thå into the hand of them that såk thy life, and into the hand of them whose face thou fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans. 
And I wiì cast thå out, and thy mother that bare thå, into another country, where ye were not born; and there shaì ye die. 
But to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shaì they not return. 
Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? is he a veóel wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his såd, and are cast into a land which they know not? 
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD, Write ye this man childleó, a man that shaì not prosper in his days: for no man of his såd shaì prosper, siôing upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah. 
Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scaôer the shåp of my pasture! saith the LORD. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD God of Israel against the pastors that fåd my people; Ye have scaôered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them: behold, I wiì visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the LORD. 
And I wiì gather the remnant of my flock out of aì countries whither I have driven them, and wiì bring them again to their folds; and they shaì be fruitful and increase. 
And I wiì set up shepherds over them which shaì fåd them: and they shaì fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shaì they be lacking, saith the LORD. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shaì reign and prosper, and shaì execute judgment and justice in the earth. 
In his days Judah shaì be saved, and Israel shaì dweì safely: and this is his name whereby he shaì be caìed, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNEÓ. 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that they shaì no more say, The LORD liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt; 
But, The LORD liveth, which brought up and which led the såd of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from aì countries whither I had driven them; and they shaì dweì in their own land. 
Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; aì my bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath overcome, because of the LORD, and because of the words of his holineó. 
For the land is fuì of adulterers; for because of swearing the land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderneó are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is not right. 
For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their wickedneó, saith the LORD. 
Wherefore their way shaì be unto them as sliðery ways in the darkneó: they shaì be driven on, and faì therein: for I wiì bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the LORD. 
And I have sån foìy in the prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Bál, and caused my people Israel to eò. 
I have sån also in the prophets of Jerusalem an hoòible thing: they coíit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedneó; they are aì of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomoòah. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the prophets; Behold, I wiì fåd them with wormwïd, and make them drink the water of gaì: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneneó gone forth into aì the land. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the LORD. 
They say stiì unto them that despise me, The LORD hath said, Ye shaì have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shaì come upon you. 
For who hath stïd in the counsel of the LORD, and hath perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard it? 
Behold, a whirlwind of the LORD is gone forth in fury, even a grievous whirlwind: it shaì faì grievously upon the head of the wicked. 
The anger of the LORD shaì not return, until he have executed, and tiì he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the laôer days ye shaì consider it perfectly. 
I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. 
But if they had stïd in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings. 
Am I a God at hand, saith the LORD, and not a God afar oæ? 
Can any hide himself in secret places that I shaì not så him? saith the LORD. Do not I fiì heaven and earth? saith the LORD. 
I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed. 
How long shaì this be in the heart of the prophets that prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own heart; 
Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they teì every man to his neighbour, as their fathers have forgoôen my name for Bál. 
The prophet that hath a dream, let him teì a dream; and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfuìy. What is the chaæ to the wheat? saith the LORD. 
Is not my word like as a fire? saith the LORD; and like a haíer that breaketh the rock in pieces? 
Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that steal my words every one from his neighbour. 
Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that use their tongues, and say, He saith. 
Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the LORD, and do teì them, and cause my people to eò by their lies, and by their lightneó; yet I sent them not, nor coíanded them: therefore they shaì not profit this people at aì, saith the LORD. 
And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shaì ask thå, saying, What is the burden of the LORD? thou shalt then say unto them, What burden? I wiì even forsake you, saith the LORD. 
And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that shaì say, The burden of the LORD, I wiì even punish that man and his house. 
Thus shaì ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to his brother, What hath the LORD answered? and, What hath the LORD spoken? 
And the burden of the LORD shaì ye mention no more: for every man's word shaì be his burden; for ye have perverted the words of the living God, of the LORD of hosts our God. 
Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What hath the LORD answered thå? and, What hath the LORD spoken? 
But since ye say, The burden of the LORD; therefore thus saith the LORD; Because ye say this word, The burden of the LORD, and I have sent unto you, saying, Ye shaì not say, The burden of the LORD; 
Therefore, behold, I, even I, wiì uôerly forget you, and I wiì forsake you, and the city that I gave you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence: 
And I wiì bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shaì not be forgoôen. 
The LORD shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the LORD, after that Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon had caòied away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon. 
One basket had very gïd figs, even like the figs that are first ripe: and the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad. 
Then said the LORD unto me, What såst thou, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs; the gïd figs, very gïd; and the evil, very evil, that caîot be eaten, they are so evil. 
Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Like these gïd figs, so wiì I acknowledge them that are caòied away captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for their gïd. 
For I wiì set mine eyes upon them for gïd, and I wiì bring them again to this land: and I wiì build them, and not puì them down; and I wiì plant them, and not pluck them up. 
And I wiì give them an heart to know me, that I am the LORD: and they shaì be my people, and I wiì be their God: for they shaì return unto me with their whole heart. 
And as the evil figs, which caîot be eaten, they are so evil; surely thus saith the LORD, So wiì I give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this land, and them that dweì in the land of Egypt: 
And I wiì deliver them to be removed into aì the kingdoms of the earth for their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in aì places whither I shaì drive them. 
And I wiì send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, tiì they be consumed from oæ the land that I gave unto them and to their fathers. 
The word that came to Jeremiah concerning aì the people of Judah in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that was the first year of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon; 
The which Jeremiah the prophet spake unto aì the people of Judah, and to aì the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, 
From the thirtånth year of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that is the thrå and twentieth year, the word of the LORD hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not hearkened. 
And the LORD hath sent unto you aì his servants the prophets, rising early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear. 
They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dweì in the land that the LORD hath given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever: 
And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the works of your hands; and I wiì do you no hurt. 
Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the LORD; that ye might provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts; Because ye have not heard my words, 
Behold, I wiì send and take aì the families of the north, saith the LORD, and Nebuchadreúar the king of Babylon, my servant, and wiì bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants thereof, and against aì these nations round about, and wiì uôerly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an hióing, and perpetual desolations. 
Moreover I wiì take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladneó, the voice of the bridegrïm, and the voice of the bride, the sound of the miìstones, and the light of the candle. 
And this whole land shaì be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations shaì serve the king of Babylon seventy years. 
And it shaì come to paó, when seventy years are aãomplished, that I wiì punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the LORD, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and wiì make it perpetual desolations. 
And I wiì bring upon that land aì my words which I have pronounced against it, even aì that is wriôen in this bïk, which Jeremiah hath prophesied against aì the nations. 
For many nations and great kings shaì serve themselves of them also: and I wiì recompense them aãording to their dåds, and aãording to the works of their own hands. 
For thus saith the LORD God of Israel unto me; Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause aì the nations, to whom I send thå, to drink it. 
And they shaì drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword that I wiì send among them. 
Then tïk I the cup at the LORD's hand, and made aì the nations to drink, unto whom the LORD had sent me: 
To wit, Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hióing, and a curse; as it is this day; 
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his princes, and aì his people; 
And aì the mingled people, and aì the kings of the land of Uz, and aì the kings of the land of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Aúah, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod, 
Edom, and Moab, and the children of Aíon, 
And aì the kings of Tyrus, and aì the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the isles which are beyond the sea, 
Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and aì that are in the utmost corners, 
And aì the kings of Arabia, and aì the kings of the mingled people that dweì in the desert, 
And aì the kings of Zimri, and aì the kings of Elam, and aì the kings of the Medes, 
And aì the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and aì the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shaì drink after them. 
Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and faì, and rise no more, because of the sword which I wiì send among you. 
And it shaì be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ye shaì certainly drink. 
For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is caìed by my name, and should ye be uôerly unpunished? Ye shaì not be unpunished: for I wiì caì for a sword upon aì the inhabitants of the earth, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Therefore prophesy thou against them aì these words, and say unto them, The LORD shaì roar from on high, and uôer his voice from his holy habitation; he shaì mightily roar upon his habitation; he shaì give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against aì the inhabitants of the earth. 
A noise shaì come even to the ends of the earth; for the LORD hath a controversy with the nations, he wiì plead with aì flesh; he wiì give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, evil shaì go forth from nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shaì be raised up from the coasts of the earth. 
And the slain of the LORD shaì be at that day from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shaì not be lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shaì be dung upon the ground. 
Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and waìow yourselves in the ashes, ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions are aãomplished; and ye shaì faì like a pleasant veóel. 
And the shepherds shaì have no way to flå, nor the principal of the flock to escape. 
A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the principal of the flock, shaì be heard: for the LORD hath spoiled their pasture. 
And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce anger of the LORD. 
He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is desolate because of the fierceneó of the oðreóor, and because of his fierce anger. 
In the begiîing of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word from the LORD, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD; Stand in the court of the LORD's house, and speak unto aì the cities of Judah, which come to worship in the LORD's house, aì the words that I coíand thå to speak unto them; diminish not a word: 
If so be they wiì hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them because of the evil of their doings. 
And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD; If ye wiì not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you, 
To hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto you, both rising up early, and sending them, but ye have not hearkened; 
Then wiì I make this house like Shiloh, and wiì make this city a curse to aì the nations of the earth. 
So the priests and the prophets and aì the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of the LORD. 
Now it came to paó, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking aì that the LORD had coíanded him to speak unto aì the people, that the priests and the prophets and aì the people tïk him, saying, Thou shalt surely die. 
Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the LORD, saying, This house shaì be like Shiloh, and this city shaì be desolate without an inhabitant? And aì the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the house of the LORD. 
When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up from the king's house unto the house of the LORD, and sat down in the entry of the new gate of the LORD's house. 
Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to aì the people, saying, This man is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears. 
Then spake Jeremiah unto aì the princes and to aì the people, saying, The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city aì the words that ye have heard. 
Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD wiì repent him of the evil that he hath pronounced against you. 
As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do with me as såmeth gïd and måt unto you. 
But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shaì surely bring iîocent blïd upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the LORD hath sent me unto you to speak aì these words in your ears. 
Then said the princes and aì the people unto the priests and to the prophets; This man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us in the name of the LORD our God. 
Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to aì the aóembly of the people, saying, 
Micah the Morasthite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to aì the people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Zion shaì be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shaì become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest. 
Did Hezekiah king of Judah and aì Judah put him at aì to death? did he not fear the LORD, and besought the LORD, and the LORD repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we procure great evil against our souls. 
And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the LORD, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjathjearim, who prophesied against this city and against this land aãording to aì the words of Jeremiah. 
And when Jehoiakim the king, with aì his mighty men, and aì the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death: but when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt; 
And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt. 
And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the coíon people. 
Nevertheleó the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death. 
In the begiîing of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD to me; Make thå bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy neck, 
And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the Aíonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the king of Zidon, by the hand of the meóengers which come to Jerusalem unto Zedekiah king of Judah; 
And coíand them to say unto their masters, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shaì ye say unto your masters; 
I have made the earth, the man and the beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it såmed måt unto me. 
And now have I given aì these lands into the hand of Nebuchadneúar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the field have I given him also to serve him. 
And aì nations shaì serve him, and his son, and his son's son, until the very time of his land come: and then many nations and great kings shaì serve themselves of him. 
And it shaì come to paó, that the nation and kingdom which wiì not serve the same Nebuchadneúar the king of Babylon, and that wiì not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation wiì I punish, saith the LORD, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand. 
Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers, which speak unto you, saying, Ye shaì not serve the king of Babylon: 
For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish. 
But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those wiì I let remain stiì in their own land, saith the LORD; and they shaì tiì it, and dweì therein. 
I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah aãording to aì these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live. 
Why wiì ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as the LORD hath spoken against the nation that wiì not serve the king of Babylon? 
Therefore hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you, saying, Ye shaì not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you. 
For I have not sent them, saith the LORD, yet they prophesy a lie in my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish, ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you. 
Also I spake to the priests and to aì this people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Hearken not to the words of your prophets that prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the veóels of the LORD's house shaì now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a lie unto you. 
Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live: wherefore should this city be laid waste? 
But if they be prophets, and if the word of the LORD be with them, let them now make interceóion to the LORD of hosts, that the veóels which are left in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the piìars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the residue of the veóels that remain in this city. 
Which Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon tïk not, when he caòied away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to Babylon, and aì the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; 
Yea, thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the veóels that remain in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah and of Jerusalem; 
They shaì be caòied to Babylon, and there shaì they be until the day that I visit them, saith the LORD; then wiì I bring them up, and restore them to this place. 
And it came to paó the same year, in the begiîing of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was of Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the LORD, in the presence of the priests and of aì the people, saying, 
Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 
Within two fuì years wiì I bring again into this place aì the veóels of the LORD's house, that Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon tïk away from this place, and caòied them to Babylon: 
And I wiì bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with aì the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the LORD: for I wiì break the yoke of the king of Babylon. 
Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of aì the people that stïd in the house of the LORD, 
Even the prophet Jeremiah said, Amen: the LORD do so: the LORD perform thy words which thou hast prophesied, to bring again the veóels of the LORD's house, and aì that is caòied away captive, from Babylon into this place. 
Nevertheleó hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of aì the people; 
The prophets that have bån before me and before thå of old prophesied both against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence. 
The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shaì come to paó, then shaì the prophet be known, that the LORD hath truly sent him. 
Then Hananiah the prophet tïk the yoke from oæ the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and brake it. 
And Hananiah spake in the presence of aì the people, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Even so wiì I break the yoke of Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon from the neck of aì nations within the space of two fuì years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way. 
Then the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from oæ the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying, 
Go and teì Hananiah, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Thou hast broken the yokes of wïd; but thou shalt make for them yokes of iron. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of aì these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon; and they shaì serve him: and I have given him the beasts of the field also. 
Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah; The LORD hath not sent thå; but thou makest this people to trust in a lie. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì cast thå from oæ the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast taught rebeìion against the LORD. 
So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month. 
Now these are the words of the leôer that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders which were caòied away captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to aì the people whom Nebuchadneúar had caòied away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon; 
(After that Jeconiah the king, and the quån, and the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;) 
By the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon) saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, unto aì that are caòied away captives, whom I have caused to be caòied away from Jerusalem unto Babylon; 
Build ye houses, and dweì in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them; 
Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye may be increased there, and not diminished. 
And såk the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be caòied away captives, and pray unto the LORD for it: for in the peace thereof shaì ye have peace. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed. 
For they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent them, saith the LORD. 
For thus saith the LORD, That after seventy years be aãomplished at Babylon I wiì visit you, and perform my gïd word toward you, in causing you to return to this place. 
For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end. 
Then shaì ye caì upon me, and ye shaì go and pray unto me, and I wiì hearken unto you. 
And ye shaì såk me, and find me, when ye shaì search for me with aì your heart. 
And I wiì be found of you, saith the LORD: and I wiì turn away your captivity, and I wiì gather you from aì the nations, and from aì the places whither I have driven you, saith the LORD; and I wiì bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be caòied away captive. 
Because ye have said, The LORD hath raised us up prophets in Babylon; 
Know that thus saith the LORD of the king that siôeth upon the throne of David, and of aì the people that dweìeth in this city, and of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into captivity; 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I wiì send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and wiì make them like vile figs, that caîot be eaten, they are so evil. 
And I wiì persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and wiì deliver them to be removed to aì the kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hióing, and a reproach, among aì the nations whither I have driven them: 
Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the LORD, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the LORD. 
Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD, aì ye of the captivity, whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon: 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah the son of Máseiah, which prophesy a lie unto you in my name; Behold, I wiì deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon; and he shaì slay them before your eyes; 
And of them shaì be taken up a curse by aì the captivity of Judah which are in Babylon, saying, The LORD make thå like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire; 
Because they have coíiôed viìany in Israel, and have coíiôed adultery with their neighbours' wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I have not coíanded them; even I know, and am a witneó, saith the LORD. 
Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying, 
Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because thou hast sent leôers in thy name unto aì the people that are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Máseiah the priest, and to aì the priests, saying, 
The LORD hath made thå priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be oæicers in the house of the LORD, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks. 
Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, which maketh himself a prophet to you? 
For therefore he sent unto us in Babylon, saying, This captivity is long: build ye houses, and dweì in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them. 
And Zephaniah the priest read this leôer in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying, 
Send to aì them of the captivity, saying, Thus saith the LORD concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto you, and I sent him not, and he caused you to trust in a lie: 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his såd: he shaì not have a man to dweì among this people; neither shaì he behold the gïd that I wiì do for my people, saith the LORD; because he hath taught rebeìion against the LORD. 
The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 
Thus speaketh the LORD God of Israel, saying, Write thå aì the words that I have spoken unto thå in a bïk. 
For, lo, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the LORD: and I wiì cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shaì poóeó it. 
And these are the words that the LORD spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah. 
For thus saith the LORD; We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace. 
Ask ye now, and så whether a man doth travail with child? wherefore do I så every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and aì faces are turned into paleneó? 
Alas! for that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of Jacob's trouble, but he shaì be saved out of it. 
For it shaì come to paó in that day, saith the LORD of hosts, that I wiì break his yoke from oæ thy neck, and wiì burst thy bonds, and strangers shaì no more serve themselves of him: 
But they shaì serve the LORD their God, and David their king, whom I wiì raise up unto them. 
Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the LORD; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I wiì save thå from afar, and thy såd from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shaì return, and shaì be in rest, and be quiet, and none shaì make him afraid. 
For I am with thå, saith the LORD, to save thå: though I make a fuì end of aì nations whither I have scaôered thå, yet I wiì not make a fuì end of thå: but I wiì coòect thå in measure, and wiì not leave thå altogether unpunished. 
For thus saith the LORD, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound is grievous. 
There is none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines. 
Aì thy lovers have forgoôen thå; they såk thå not; for I have wounded thå with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were increased. 
Why criest thou for thine aæliction? thy soòow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thå. 
Therefore aì they that devour thå shaì be devoured; and aì thine adversaries, every one of them, shaì go into captivity; and they that spoil thå shaì be a spoil, and aì that prey upon thå wiì I give for a prey. 
For I wiì restore health unto thå, and I wiì heal thå of thy wounds, saith the LORD; because they caìed thå an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man såketh after. 
Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì bring again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dweìingplaces; and the city shaì be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shaì remain after the maîer thereof. 
And out of them shaì procåd thanksgiving and the voice of them that make meòy: and I wiì multiply them, and they shaì not be few; I wiì also glorify them, and they shaì not be smaì. 
Their children also shaì be as aforetime, and their congregation shaì be established before me, and I wiì punish aì that oðreó them. 
And their nobles shaì be of themselves, and their governor shaì procåd from the midst of them; and I wiì cause him to draw near, and he shaì aðroach unto me: for who is this that engaged his heart to aðroach unto me? saith the LORD. 
And ye shaì be my people, and I wiì be your God. 
Behold, the whirlwind of the LORD goeth forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shaì faì with pain upon the head of the wicked. 
The fierce anger of the LORD shaì not return, until he hath done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the laôer days ye shaì consider it. 
At the same time, saith the LORD, wiì I be the God of aì the families of Israel, and they shaì be my people. 
Thus saith the LORD, The people which were left of the sword found grace in the wilderneó; even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest. 
The LORD hath aðeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved thå with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindneó have I drawn thå. 
Again I wiì build thå, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make meòy. 
Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the planters shaì plant, and shaì eat them as coíon things. 
For there shaì be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shaì cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the LORD our God. 
For thus saith the LORD; Sing with gladneó for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O LORD, save thy people, the remnant of Israel. 
Behold, I wiì bring them from the north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a great company shaì return thither. 
They shaì come with wåping, and with suðlications wiì I lead them: I wiì cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, wherein they shaì not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn. 
Hear the word of the LORD, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar oæ, and say, He that scaôered Israel wiì gather him, and kåp him, as a shepherd doth his flock. 
For the LORD hath redåmed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was stronger than he. 
Therefore they shaì come and sing in the height of Zion, and shaì flow together to the gïdneó of the LORD, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and their soul shaì be as a watered garden; and they shaì not soòow any more at aì. 
Then shaì the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and old together: for I wiì turn their mourning into joy, and wiì comfort them, and make them rejoice from their soòow. 
And I wiì satiate the soul of the priests with fatneó, and my people shaì be satisfied with my gïdneó, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and biôer wåping; Rahel wåping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not. 
Thus saith the LORD; Refrain thy voice from wåping, and thine eyes from tears: for thy work shaì be rewarded, saith the LORD; and they shaì come again from the land of the enemy. 
And there is hope in thine end, saith the LORD, that thy children shaì come again to their own border. 
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a buìock unaãustomed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I shaì be turned; for thou art the LORD my God. 
Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. 
Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember him stiì: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I wiì surely have mercy upon him, saith the LORD. 
Set thå up waymarks, make thå high heaps: set thine heart toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities. 
How long wilt thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for the LORD hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shaì compaó a man. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; As yet they shaì use this spåch in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I shaì bring again their captivity; The LORD bleó thå, O habitation of justice, and mountain of holineó. 
And there shaì dweì in Judah itself, and in aì the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks. 
For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every soòowful soul. 
Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my slåp was swåt unto me. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the såd of man, and with the såd of beast. 
And it shaì come to paó, that like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to aælict; so wiì I watch over them, to build, and to plant, saith the LORD. 
In those days they shaì say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children's tåth are set on edge. 
But every one shaì die for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his tåth shaì be set on edge. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: 
Not aãording to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I tïk them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the LORD: 
But this shaì be the covenant that I wiì make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the LORD, I wiì put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and wiì be their God, and they shaì be my people. 
And they shaì teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the LORD: for they shaì aì know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD: for I wiì forgive their iniquity, and I wiì remember their sin no more. 
Thus saith the LORD, which giveth the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the mïn and of the stars for a light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The LORD of hosts is his name: 
If those ordinances depart from before me, saith the LORD, then the såd of Israel also shaì cease from being a nation before me for ever. 
Thus saith the LORD; If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I wiì also cast oæ aì the såd of Israel for aì that they have done, saith the LORD. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the city shaì be built to the LORD from the tower of Hananål unto the gate of the corner. 
And the measuring line shaì yet go forth over against it upon the hiì Gareb, and shaì compaó about to Goath. 
And the whole vaìey of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and aì the fields unto the brïk of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse gate toward the east, shaì be holy unto the LORD; it shaì not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever. 
The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eightånth year of Nebuchadreúar. 
For then the king of Babylon's army besieged Jerusalem: and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which was in the king of Judah's house. 
For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Wherefore dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I wiì give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shaì take it; 
And Zedekiah king of Judah shaì not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shaì surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shaì speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shaì behold his eyes; 
And he shaì lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and there shaì he be until I visit him, saith the LORD: though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shaì not prosper. 
And Jeremiah said, The word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Behold, Hanamål the son of Shaìum thine uncle shaì come unto thå saying, Buy thå my field that is in Anathoth: for the right of redemption is thine to buy it. 
So Hanamål mine uncle's son came to me in the court of the prison aãording to the word of the LORD, and said unto me, Buy my field, I pray thå, that is in Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin: for the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine; buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of the LORD. 
And I bought the field of Hanamål my uncle's son, that was in Anathoth, and weighed him the money, even seventån shekels of silver. 
And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it, and tïk witneóes, and weighed him the money in the balances. 
So I tïk the evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed aãording to the law and custom, and that which was open: 
And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Máseiah, in the sight of Hanamål mine uncle's son, and in the presence of the witneóes that subscribed the bïk of the purchase, before aì the Jews that sat in the court of the prison. 
And I charged Baruch before them, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these evidences, this evidence of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence which is open; and put them in an earthen veóel, that they may continue many days. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Houses and fields and vineyards shaì be poóeóed again in this land. 
Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the LORD, saying, 
Ah Lord GOD! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing tï hard for thå: 
Thou shewest lovingkindneó unto thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them: the Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of hosts, is his name, 
Great in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon aì the ways of the sons of men: to give every one aãording to his ways, and aãording to the fruit of his doings: 
Which hast set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and among other men; and hast made thå a name, as at this day; 
And hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with great teòor; 
And hast given them this land, which thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey; 
And they came in, and poóeóed it; but they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done nothing of aì that thou coíandedst them to do: therefore thou hast caused aì this evil to come upon them: 
Behold the mounts, they are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come to paó; and, behold, thou såst it. 
And thou hast said unto me, O Lord GOD, Buy thå the field for money, and take witneóes; for the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying, 
Behold, I am the LORD, the God of aì flesh: is there any thing tï hard for me? 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, and he shaì take it: 
And the Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shaì come and set fire on this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose rïfs they have oæered incense unto Bál, and poured out drink oæerings unto other gods, to provoke me to anger. 
For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only done evil before me from their youth: for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the LORD. 
For this city hath bån to me as a provocation of mine anger and of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that I should remove it from before my face, 
Because of aì the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face: though I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction. 
But they set their abominations in the house, which is caìed by my name, to defile it. 
And they built the high places of Bál, which are in the vaìey of the son of Hiîom, to cause their sons and their daughters to paó through the fire unto Molech; which I coíanded them not, neither came it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin. 
And now therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shaì be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence; 
Behold, I wiì gather them out of aì countries, whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great wrath; and I wiì bring them again unto this place, and I wiì cause them to dweì safely: 
And they shaì be my people, and I wiì be their God: 
And I wiì give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the gïd of them, and of their children after them: 
And I wiì make an everlasting covenant with them, that I wiì not turn away from them, to do them gïd; but I wiì put my fear in their hearts, that they shaì not depart from me. 
Yea, I wiì rejoice over them to do them gïd, and I wiì plant them in this land aóuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul. 
For thus saith the LORD; Like as I have brought aì this great evil upon this people, so wiì I bring upon them aì the gïd that I have promised them. 
And fields shaì be bought in this land, whereof ye say, It is desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the Chaldeans. 
Men shaì buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal them, and take witneóes in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the mountains, and in the cities of the vaìey, and in the cities of the south: for I wiì cause their captivity to return, saith the LORD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD the maker thereof, the LORD that formed it, to establish it; the LORD is his name; 
Caì unto me, and I wiì answer thå, and shew thå great and mighty things, which thou knowest not. 
For thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword; 
They come to fight with the Chaldeans, but it is to fiì them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for aì whose wickedneó I have hid my face from this city. 
Behold, I wiì bring it health and cure, and I wiì cure them, and wiì reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth. 
And I wiì cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and wiì build them, as at the first. 
And I wiì cleanse them from aì their iniquity, whereby they have siîed against me; and I wiì pardon aì their iniquities, whereby they have siîed, and whereby they have transgreóed against me. 
And it shaì be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour before aì the nations of the earth, which shaì hear aì the gïd that I do unto them: and they shaì fear and tremble for aì the gïdneó and for aì the prosperity that I procure unto it. 
Thus saith the LORD; Again there shaì be heard in this place, which ye say shaì be desolate without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the stråts of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast, 
The voice of joy, and the voice of gladneó, the voice of the bridegrïm, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shaì say, Praise the LORD of hosts: for the LORD is gïd; for his mercy endureth for ever: and of them that shaì bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the LORD. For I wiì cause to return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Again in this place, which is desolate without man and without beast, and in aì the cities thereof, shaì be an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down. 
In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shaì the flocks paó again under the hands of him that teìeth them, saith the LORD. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì perform that gïd thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the house of Judah. 
In those days, and at that time, wiì I cause the Branch of righteousneó to grow up unto David; and he shaì execute judgment and righteousneó in the land. 
In those days shaì Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shaì dweì safely: and this is the name wherewith she shaì be caìed, The LORD our righteousneó. 
For thus saith the LORD; David shaì never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel; 
Neither shaì the priests the Levites want a man before me to oæer burnt oæerings, and to kindle meat oæerings, and to do sacrifice continuaìy. 
And the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season; 
Then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers. 
As the host of heaven caîot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured: so wiì I multiply the såd of David my servant, and the Levites that minister unto me. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, saying, 
Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families which the LORD hath chosen, he hath even cast them oæ? thus they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation before them. 
Thus saith the LORD; If my covenant be not with day and night, and if I have not aðointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 
Then wiì I cast away the såd of Jacob and David my servant, so that I wiì not take any of his såd to be rulers over the såd of Abraham, Isác, and Jacob: for I wiì cause their captivity to return, and have mercy on them. 
The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon, and aì his army, and aì the kingdoms of the earth of his dominion, and aì the people, fought against Jerusalem, and against aì the cities thereof, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and teì him, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shaì burn it with fire: 
And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken, and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shaì behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shaì speak with thå mouth to mouth, and thou shalt go to Babylon. 
Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus saith the LORD of thå, Thou shalt not die by the sword: 
But thou shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings which were before thå, so shaì they burn odours for thå; and they wiì lament thå, saying, Ah lord! for I have pronounced the word, saith the LORD. 
Then Jeremiah the prophet spake aì these words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, 
When the king of Babylon's army fought against Jerusalem, and against aì the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish, and against Azekah: for these defenced cities remained of the cities of Judah. 
This is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, after that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with aì the people which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them; 
That every man should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, being an Hebrew or an Hebreweó, go frå; that none should serve himself of them, to wit, of a Jew his brother. 
Now when aì the princes, and aì the people, which had entered into the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and every one his maidservant, go frå, that none should serve themselves of them any more, then they obeyed, and let them go. 
But afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go frå, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids. 
Therefore the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen, saying, 
At the end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew, which hath bån sold unto thå; and when he hath served thå six years, thou shalt let him go frå from thå: but your fathers hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear. 
And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is caìed by my name: 
But ye turned and poìuted my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom he had set at liberty at their pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for servants and for handmaids. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the LORD, to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I wiì make you to be removed into aì the kingdoms of the earth. 
And I wiì give the men that have transgreóed my covenant, which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and paóed betwån the parts thereof, 
The princes of Judah, and the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and aì the people of the land, which paóed betwån the parts of the calf; 
I wiì even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that såk their life: and their dead bodies shaì be for meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth. 
And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes wiì I give into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that såk their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which are gone up from you. 
Behold, I wiì coíand, saith the LORD, and cause them to return to this city; and they shaì fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire: and I wiì make the cities of Judah a desolation without an inhabitant. 
The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying, 
Go unto the house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the house of the LORD, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink. 
Then I tïk Jázaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and aì his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites; 
And I brought them into the house of the LORD, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God, which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber of Máseiah the son of Shaìum, the kåper of the dïr: 
And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots fuì of wine, and cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine. 
But they said, We wiì drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of Rechab our father coíanded us, saying, Ye shaì drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever: 
Neither shaì ye build house, nor sow såd, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but aì your days ye shaì dweì in tents; that ye may live many days in the land where ye be strangers. 
Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our father in aì that he hath charged us, to drink no wine aì our days, we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters; 
Nor to build houses for us to dweì in: neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor såd: 
But we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done aãording to aì that Jonadab our father coíanded us. 
But it came to paó, when Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians: so we dweì at Jerusalem. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Go and teì the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Wiì ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? saith the LORD. 
The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he coíanded his sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink none, but obey their father's coíandment: notwithstanding I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto me. 
I have sent also unto you aì my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shaì dweì in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto me. 
Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the coíandment of their father, which he coíanded them; but this people hath not hearkened unto me: 
Therefore thus saith the LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì bring upon Judah and upon aì the inhabitants of Jerusalem aì the evil that I have pronounced against them: because I have spoken unto them, but they have not heard; and I have caìed unto them, but they have not answered. 
And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the coíandment of Jonadab your father, and kept aì his precepts, and done aãording unto aì that he hath coíanded you: 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the son of Rechab shaì not want a man to stand before me for ever. 
And it came to paó in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 
Take thå a roì of a bïk, and write therein aì the words that I have spoken unto thå against Israel, and against Judah, and against aì the nations, from the day I spake unto thå, from the days of Josiah, even unto this day. 
It may be that the house of Judah wiì hear aì the evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. 
Then Jeremiah caìed Baruch the son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah aì the words of the LORD, which he had spoken unto him, upon a roì of a bïk. 
And Jeremiah coíanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I caîot go into the house of the LORD: 
Therefore go thou, and read in the roì, which thou hast wriôen from my mouth, the words of the LORD in the ears of the people in the LORD's house upon the fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears of aì Judah that come out of their cities. 
It may be they wiì present their suðlication before the LORD, and wiì return every one from his evil way: for great is the anger and the fury that the LORD hath pronounced against this people. 
And Baruch the son of Neriah did aãording to aì that Jeremiah the prophet coíanded him, reading in the bïk the words of the LORD in the LORD's house. 
And it came to paó in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before the LORD to aì the people in Jerusalem, and to aì the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem. 
Then read Baruch in the bïk the words of Jeremiah in the house of the LORD, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the higher court, at the entry of the new gate of the LORD's house, in the ears of aì the people. 
When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the bïk aì the words of the LORD, 
Then he went down into the king's house, into the scribe's chamber: and, lo, aì the princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and aì the princes. 
Then Michaiah declared unto them aì the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the bïk in the ears of the people. 
Therefore aì the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine hand the roì wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah tïk the roì in his hand, and came unto them. 
And they said unto him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears. 
Now it came to paó, when they had heard aì the words, they were afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, We wiì surely teì the king of aì these words. 
And they asked Baruch, saying, Teì us now, How didst thou write aì these words at his mouth? 
Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced aì these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the bïk. 
Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide thå, thou and Jeremiah; and let no man know where ye be. 
And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up the roì in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told aì the words in the ears of the king. 
So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roì: and he tïk it out of Elishama the scribe's chamber. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of aì the princes which stïd beside the king. 
Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him. 
And it came to paó, that when Jehudi had read thrå or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until aì the roì was consumed in the fire that was on the hearth. 
Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard aì these words. 
Nevertheleó Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made interceóion to the king that he would not burn the roì: but he would not hear them. 
But the king coíanded Jerahmål the son of Haíelech, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdål, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the LORD hid them. 
Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, after that the king had burned the roì, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying, 
Take thå again another roì, and write in it aì the former words that were in the first roì, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burned. 
And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah, Thus saith the LORD; Thou hast burned this roì, saying, Why hast thou wriôen therein, saying, The king of Babylon shaì certainly come and destroy this land, and shaì cause to cease from thence man and beast? 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shaì have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shaì be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost. 
And I wiì punish him and his såd and his servants for their iniquity; and I wiì bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, aì the evil that I have pronounced against them; but they hearkened not. 
Then tïk Jeremiah another roì, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah aì the words of the bïk which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire: and there were aäed besides unto them many like words. 
And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah. 
But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did hearken unto the words of the LORD, which he spake by the prophet Jeremiah. 
And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Máseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now unto the LORD our God for us. 
Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had not put him into prison. 
Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed from Jerusalem. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto the prophet Jeremiah saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Thus shaì ye say to the king of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold, Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shaì return to Egypt into their own land. 
And the Chaldeans shaì come again, and fight against this city, and take it, and burn it with fire. 
Thus saith the LORD; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shaì surely depart from us: for they shaì not depart. 
For though ye had smiôen the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire. 
And it came to paó, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army, 
Then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to separate himself thence in the midst of the people. 
And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he tïk Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou faìest away to the Chaldeans. 
Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I faì not away to the Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah tïk Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes. 
Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they had made that the prison. 
When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many days; 
Then Zedekiah the king sent, and tïk him out: and the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any word from the LORD? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon. 
Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I oæended against thå, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison? 
Where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shaì not come against you, nor against this land? 
Therefore hear now, I pray thå, O my lord the king: let my suðlication, I pray thå, be aãepted before thå; that thou cause me not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there. 
Then Zedekiah the king coíanded that they should coíit Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a piece of bread out of the bakers' stråt, until aì the bread in the city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison. 
Then Shephatiah the son of Maôan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto aì the people, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, He that remaineth in this city shaì die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shaì live; for he shaì have his life for a prey, and shaì live. 
Thus saith the LORD, This city shaì surely be given into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which shaì take it. 
Therefore the princes said unto the king, We besåch thå, let this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men of war that remain in this city, and the hands of aì the people, in speaking such words unto them: for this man såketh not the welfare of this people, but the hurt. 
Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand: for the king is not he that can do any thing against you. 
Then tïk they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Haíelech, that was in the court of the prison: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire. 
Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon; the king then siôing in the gate of Benjamin; 
Ebedmelech went forth out of the king's house, and spake to the king saying, 
My lord the king, these men have done evil in aì that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no more bread in the city. 
Then the king coíanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from hence thirty men with thå, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he die. 
So Ebedmelech tïk the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and tïk thence old cast clouts and old roôen rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. 
And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts and roôen rags under thine armholes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so. 
So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and tïk him up out of the dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison. 
Then Zedekiah the king sent, and tïk Jeremiah the prophet unto him into the third entry that is in the house of the LORD: and the king said unto Jeremiah, I wiì ask thå a thing; hide nothing from me. 
Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare it unto thå, wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thå counsel, wilt thou not hearken unto me? 
So Zedekiah the king sware secretly unto Jeremiah, saying, As the LORD liveth, that made us this soul, I wiì not put thå to death, neither wiì I give thå into the hand of these men that såk thy life. 
Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt aóuredly go forth unto the king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shaì live, and this city shaì not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house: 
But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes, then shaì this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shaì burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand. 
And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews that are faìen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me. 
But Jeremiah said, They shaì not deliver thå. Obey, I besåch thå, the voice of the LORD, which I speak unto thå: so it shaì be weì unto thå, and thy soul shaì live. 
But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the LORD hath shewed me: 
And, behold, aì the women that are left in the king of Judah's house shaì be brought forth to the king of Babylon's princes, and those women shaì say, Thy friends have set thå on, and have prevailed against thå: thy fåt are sunk in the mire, and they are turned away back. 
So they shaì bring out aì thy wives and thy children to the Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this city to be burned with fire. 
Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words, and thou shalt not die. 
But if the princes hear that I have talked with thå, and they come unto thå, and say unto thå, Declare unto us now what thou hast said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we wiì not put thå to death; also what the king said unto thå: 
Then thou shalt say unto them, I presented my suðlication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to die there. 
Then came aì the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he told them aãording to aì these words that the king had coíanded. So they left oæ speaking with him; for the maôer was not perceived. 
So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when Jerusalem was taken. 
In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon and aì his army against Jerusalem, and they besieged it. 
And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up. 
And aì the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the miäle gate, even Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, with aì the residue of the princes of the king of Babylon. 
And it came to paó, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw them, and aì the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate betwixt the two waìs: and he went out the way of the plain. 
But the Chaldeans' army pursued after them, and overtïk Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him. 
Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew aì the nobles of Judah. 
Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him with chains, to caòy him to Babylon. 
And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and brake down the waìs of Jerusalem. 
Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard caòied away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and those that feì away, that feì to him, with the rest of the people that remained. 
But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the pïr of the people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time. 
Now Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying, 
Take him, and lïk weì to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as he shaì say unto thå. 
So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban, Rabsaris, and Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, and aì the king of Babylon's princes; 
Even they sent, and tïk Jeremiah out of the court of the prison, and coíiôed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, that he should caòy him home: so he dwelt among the people. 
Now the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 
Go and speak to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for gïd; and they shaì be aãomplished in that day before thå. 
But I wiì deliver thå in that day, saith the LORD: and thou shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid. 
For I wiì surely deliver thå, and thou shalt not faì by the sword, but thy life shaì be for a prey unto thå: because thou hast put thy trust in me, saith the LORD. 
The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among aì that were caòied away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were caòied away captive unto Babylon. 
And the captain of the guard tïk Jeremiah, and said unto him, The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place. 
Now the LORD hath brought it, and done aãording as he hath said: because ye have siîed against the LORD, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing is come upon you. 
And now, behold, I lïse thå this day from the chains which were upon thine hand. If it såm gïd unto thå to come with me into Babylon, come; and I wiì lïk weì unto thå: but if it såm iì unto thå to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, aì the land is before thå: whither it såmeth gïd and convenient for thå to go, thither go. 
Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dweì with him among the people: or go wheresoever it såmeth convenient unto thå to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a reward, and let him go. 
Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land. 
Now when aì the captains of the forces which were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had coíiôed unto him men, and women, and children, and of the pïr of the land, of them that were not caòied away captive to Babylon; 
Then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of a Máchathite, they and their men. 
And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dweì in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shaì be weì with you. 
As for me, behold, I wiì dweì at Mizpah, to serve the Chaldeans, which wiì come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and suíer fruits, and oil, and put them in your veóels, and dweì in your cities that ye have taken. 
Likewise when aì the Jews that were in Moab, and among the Aíonites, and in Edom, and that were in aì the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan; 
Even aì the Jews returned out of aì places whither they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine and suíer fruits very much. 
Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 
And said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Bális the king of the Aíonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thå? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not. 
Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly saying, Let me go, I pray thå, and I wiì slay Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shaì know it: wherefore should he slay thå, that aì the Jews which are gathered unto thå should be scaôered, and the remnant in Judah perish? 
But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael. 
Now it came to paó in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the såd royal, and the princes of the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah. 
Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land. 
Ishmael also slew aì the Jews that were with him, even with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the men of war. 
And it came to paó the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it, 
That there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with oæerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the LORD. 
And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to måt them, wåping aì along as he went: and it came to paó, as he met them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. 
And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men that were with him. 
But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their brethren. 
Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast aì the dead bodies of the men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, was it which Asa the king had made for fear of Básha king of Israel: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah fiìed it with them that were slain. 
Then Ishmael caòied away captive aì the residue of the people that were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and aì the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had coíiôed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah caòied them away captive, and departed to go over to the Aíonites. 
But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces that were with him, heard of aì the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done, 
Then they tïk aì the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon. 
Now it came to paó, that when aì the people which were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces that were with him, then they were glad. 
So aì the people that Ishmael had caòied away captive from Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah. 
But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the Aíonites. 
Then tïk Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces that were with him, aì the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty men of war, and the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought again from Gibeon: 
And they departed, and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt, 
Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land. 
Then aì the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and aì the people from the least even unto the greatest, came near, 
And said unto Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we besåch thå, our suðlication be aãepted before thå, and pray for us unto the LORD thy God, even for aì this remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us:) 
That the LORD thy God may shew us the way wherein we may walk, and the thing that we may do. 
Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you; behold, I wiì pray unto the LORD your God aãording to your words; and it shaì come to paó, that whatsoever thing the LORD shaì answer you, I wiì declare it unto you; I wiì kåp nothing back from you. 
Then they said to Jeremiah, The LORD be a true and faithful witneó betwån us, if we do not even aãording to aì things for the which the LORD thy God shaì send thå to us. 
Whether it be gïd, or whether it be evil, we wiì obey the voice of the LORD our God, to whom we send thå; that it may be weì with us, when we obey the voice of the LORD our God. 
And it came to paó after ten days, that the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah. 
Then caìed he Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces which were with him, and aì the people from the least even to the greatest, 
And said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your suðlication before him; 
If ye wiì stiì abide in this land, then wiì I build you, and not puì you down, and I wiì plant you, and not pluck you up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you. 
Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be not afraid of him, saith the LORD: for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand. 
And I wiì shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land. 
But if ye say, We wiì not dweì in this land, neither obey the voice of the LORD your God, 
Saying, No; but we wiì go into the land of Egypt, where we shaì så no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there wiì we dweì: 
And now therefore hear the word of the LORD, ye remnant of Judah; Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye whoìy set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there; 
Then it shaì come to paó, that the sword, which ye feared, shaì overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye were afraid, shaì foìow close after you there in Egypt; and there ye shaì die. 
So shaì it be with aì the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there; they shaì die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: and none of them shaì remain or escape from the evil that I wiì bring upon them. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; As mine anger and my fury hath bån poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem; so shaì my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shaì enter into Egypt: and ye shaì be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shaì så this place no more. 
The LORD hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye not into Egypt: know certainly that I have admonished you this day. 
For ye dióembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the LORD your God, saying, Pray for us unto the LORD our God; and aãording unto aì that the LORD our God shaì say, so declare unto us, and we wiì do it. 
And now I have this day declared it to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice of the LORD your God, nor any thing for the which he hath sent me unto you. 
Now therefore know certainly that ye shaì die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to go and to sojourn. 
And it came to paó, that when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking unto aì the people aì the words of the LORD their God, for which the LORD their God had sent him to them, even aì these words, 
Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the LORD our God hath not sent thå to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there: 
But Baruch the son of Neriah seôeth thå on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, and caòy us away captives into Babylon. 
So Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces, and aì the people, obeyed not the voice of the LORD, to dweì in the land of Judah. 
But Johanan the son of Kareah, and aì the captains of the forces, tïk aì the remnant of Judah, that were returned from aì nations, whither they had bån driven, to dweì in the land of Judah; 
Even men, and women, and children, and the king's daughters, and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah. 
So they came into the land of Egypt: for they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: thus came they even to Tahpanhes. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying, 
Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the clay in the bricëiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah; 
And say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì send and take Nebuchadreúar the king of Babylon, my servant, and wiì set his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shaì spread his royal pavilion over them. 
And when he cometh, he shaì smite the land of Egypt, and deliver such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword. 
And I wiì kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shaì burn them, and caòy them away captives: and he shaì aòay himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd puôeth on his garment; and he shaì go forth from thence in peace. 
He shaì break also the images of Bethshemesh, that is in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shaì he burn with fire. 
The word that came to Jeremiah concerning aì the Jews which dweì in the land of Egypt, which dweì at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have sån aì the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon aì the cities of Judah; and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dweìeth therein, 
Because of their wickedneó which they have coíiôed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers. 
Howbeit I sent unto you aì my servants the prophets, rising early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate. 
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedneó, to burn no incense unto other gods. 
Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the stråts of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day. 
Therefore now thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of Israel; Wherefore coíit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut oæ from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to leave you none to remain; 
In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of Egypt, whither ye be gone to dweì, that ye might cut yourselves oæ, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among aì the nations of the earth? 
Have ye forgoôen the wickedneó of your fathers, and the wickedneó of the kings of Judah, and the wickedneó of their wives, and your own wickedneó, and the wickedneó of your wives, which they have coíiôed in the land of Judah, and in the stråts of Jerusalem? 
They are not humbled even unto this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì set my face against you for evil, and to cut oæ aì Judah. 
And I wiì take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shaì aì be consumed, and faì in the land of Egypt; they shaì even be consumed by the sword and by the famine: they shaì die, from the least even unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shaì be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach. 
For I wiì punish them that dweì in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: 
So that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shaì escape or remain, that they should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a desire to return to dweì there: for none shaì return but such as shaì escape. 
Then aì the men which knew that their wives had burned incense unto other gods, and aì the women that stïd by, a great multitude, even aì the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, 
As for the word that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the LORD, we wiì not hearken unto thå. 
But we wiì certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense unto the quån of heaven, and to pour out drink oæerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the stråts of Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were weì, and saw no evil. 
But since we left oæ to burn incense to the quån of heaven, and to pour out drink oæerings unto her, we have wanted aì things, and have bån consumed by the sword and by the famine. 
And when we burned incense to the quån of heaven, and poured out drink oæerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink oæerings unto her, without our men? 
Then Jeremiah said unto aì the people, to the men, and to the women, and to aì the people which had given him that answer, saying, 
The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the stråts of Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land, did not the LORD remember them, and came it not into his mind? 
So that the LORD could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have coíiôed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day. 
Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have siîed against the LORD, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil is haðened unto you, as at this day. 
Moreover Jeremiah said unto aì the people, and to aì the women, Hear the word of the LORD, aì Judah that are in the land of Egypt: 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying; Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfiìed with your hand, saying, We wiì surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the quån of heaven, and to pour out drink oæerings unto her: ye wiì surely aãomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows. 
Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, aì Judah that dweì in the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the LORD, that my name shaì no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in aì the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord GOD liveth. 
Behold, I wiì watch over them for evil, and not for gïd: and aì the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shaì be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them. 
Yet a smaì number that escape the sword shaì return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and aì the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shaì know whose words shaì stand, mine, or their's. 
And this shaì be a sign unto you, saith the LORD, that I wiì punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shaì surely stand against you for evil: 
Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì give Pharaoèophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that såk his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, his enemy, and that sought his life. 
The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he had wriôen these words in a bïk at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto thå, O Baruch: 
Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the LORD hath aäed grief to my soòow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest. 
Thus shalt thou say unto him, The LORD saith thus; Behold, that which I have built wiì I break down, and that which I have planted I wiì pluck up, even this whole land. 
And såkest thou great things for thyself? såk them not: for, behold, I wiì bring evil upon aì flesh, saith the LORD: but thy life wiì I give unto thå for a prey in aì places whither thou goest. 
The word of the LORD which came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles; 
Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaohnecho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah. 
Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to baôle. 
Harneó the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines. 
Wherefore have I sån them dismayed and turned away back? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and are fled apace, and lïk not back: for fear was round about, saith the LORD. 
Let not the swift flå away, nor the mighty man escape; they shaì stumble, and faì toward the north by the river Euphrates. 
Who is this that cometh up as a flïd, whose waters are moved as the rivers? 
Egypt riseth up like a flïd, and his waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I wiì go up, and wiì cover the earth; I wiì destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow. 
For this is the day of the Lord GOD of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword shaì devour, and it shaì be satiate and made drunk with their blïd: for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates. 
Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou shalt not be cured. 
The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath fiìed the land: for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, and they are faìen both together. 
The word that the LORD spake to Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt. 
Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thå; for the sword shaì devour round about thå. 
Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stïd not, because the LORD did drive them. 
He made many to faì, yea, one feì upon another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oðreóing sword. 
They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he hath paóed the time aðointed. 
As I live, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts, Surely as Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so shaì he come. 
O thou daughter dweìing in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into captivity: for Noph shaì be waste and desolate without an inhabitant. 
Egypt is like a very fair heifer, but destruction cometh; it cometh out of the north. 
Also her hired men are in the midst of her like faôed buìocks; for they also are turned back, and are fled away together: they did not stand, because the day of their calamity was come upon them, and the time of their visitation. 
The voice thereof shaì go like a serpent; for they shaì march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wïd. 
They shaì cut down her forest, saith the LORD, though it caîot be searched; because they are more than the graóhoðers, and are iîumerable. 
The daughter of Egypt shaì be confounded; she shaì be delivered into the hand of the people of the north. 
The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I wiì punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and aì them that trust in him: 
And I wiì deliver them into the hand of those that såk their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants: and afterward it shaì be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the LORD. 
But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O Israel: for, behold, I wiì save thå from afar oæ, and thy såd from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shaì return, and be in rest and at ease, and none shaì make him afraid. 
Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith the LORD: for I am with thå; for I wiì make a fuì end of aì the nations whither I have driven thå: but I wiì not make a fuì end of thå, but coòect thå in measure; yet wiì I not leave thå whoìy unpunished. 
The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet against the Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza. 
Thus saith the LORD; Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and shaì be an overflowing flïd, and shaì overflow the land, and aì that is therein; the city, and them that dweì therein: then the men shaì cry, and aì the inhabitants of the land shaì howl. 
At the noise of the stamping of the hïfs of his strong horses, at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his whåls, the fathers shaì not lïk back to their children for fåbleneó of hands; 
Because of the day that cometh to spoil aì the Philistines, and to cut oæ from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth: for the LORD wiì spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of Caphtor. 
Baldneó is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is cut oæ with the remnant of their vaìey: how long wilt thou cut thyself? 
O thou sword of the LORD, how long wiì it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into thy scaâard, rest, and be stiì. 
How can it be quiet, såing the LORD hath given it a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he aðointed it. 
Against Moab thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken: Misgab is confounded and dismayed. 
There shaì be no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it oæ from being a nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shaì pursue thå. 
A voice of crying shaì be from Horonaim, spoiling and great destruction. 
Moab is destroyed; her liôle ones have caused a cry to be heard. 
For in the going up of Luhith continual wåping shaì go up; for in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of destruction. 
Flå, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderneó. 
For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shaì go forth into captivity with his priests and his princes together. 
And the spoiler shaì come upon every city, and no city shaì escape: the vaìey also shaì perish, and the plain shaì be destroyed, as the LORD hath spoken. 
Give wings unto Moab, that it may flå and get away: for the cities thereof shaì be desolate, without any to dweì therein. 
Cursed be he that doeth the work of the LORD deceitfuìy, and cursed be he that kåpeth back his sword from blïd. 
Moab hath bån at ease from his youth, and he hath seôled on his lås, and hath not bån emptied from veóel to veóel, neither hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed. 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì send unto him wanderers, that shaì cause him to wander, and shaì empty his veóels, and break their boôles. 
And Moab shaì be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence. 
How say ye, We are mighty and strong men for the war? 
Moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, and his chosen young men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts. 
The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his aæliction hasteth fast. 
Aì ye that are about him, bemoan him; and aì ye that know his name, say, How is the strong staæ broken, and the beautiful rod! 
Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shaì come upon thå, and he shaì destroy thy strong holds. 
O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that flåth, and her that escapeth, and say, What is done? 
Moab is confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; teì ye it in Arnon, that Moab is spoiled, 
And judgment is come upon the plain country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mepháth, 
And upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Bethdiblathaim, 
And upon Kiriathaim, and upon Bethgamul, and upon Bethmeon, 
And upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon aì the cities of the land of Moab, far or near. 
The horn of Moab is cut oæ, and his arm is broken, saith the LORD. 
Make ye him drunken: for he magnified himself against the LORD: Moab also shaì waìow in his vomit, and he also shaì be in derision. 
For was not Israel a derision unto thå? was he found among thieves? for since thou spakest of him, thou skiðedst for joy. 
O ye that dweì in Moab, leave the cities, and dweì in the rock, and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the hole's mouth. 
We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is excåding proud) his loftineó, and his aòogancy, and his pride, and the haughtineó of his heart. 
I know his wrath, saith the LORD; but it shaì not be so; his lies shaì not so eæect it. 
Therefore wiì I howl for Moab, and I wiì cry out for aì Moab; mine heart shaì mourn for the men of Kirheres. 
O vine of Sibmah, I wiì wåp for thå with the wåping of Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach even to the sea of Jazer: the spoiler is faìen upon thy suíer fruits and upon thy vintage. 
And joy and gladneó is taken from the plentiful field, and from the land of Moab, and I have caused wine to fail from the winepreóes: none shaì tread with shouting; their shouting shaì be no shouting. 
From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh, and even unto Jahaz, have they uôered their voice, from Zoar even unto Horonaim, as an heifer of thrå years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shaì be desolate. 
Moreover I wiì cause to cease in Moab, saith the LORD, him that oæereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods. 
Therefore mine heart shaì sound for Moab like pipes, and mine heart shaì sound like pipes for the men of Kirheres: because the riches that he hath goôen are perished. 
For every head shaì be bald, and every beard cliðed: upon aì the hands shaì be cuôings, and upon the loins sackcloth. 
There shaì be lamentation generaìy upon aì the housetops of Moab, and in the stråts thereof: for I have broken Moab like a veóel wherein is no pleasure, saith the LORD. 
They shaì howl, saying, How is it broken down! how hath Moab turned the back with shame! so shaì Moab be a derision and a dismaying to aì them about him. 
For thus saith the LORD; Behold, he shaì fly as an eagle, and shaì spread his wings over Moab. 
Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the mighty men's hearts in Moab at that day shaì be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. 
And Moab shaì be destroyed from being a people, because he hath magnified himself against the LORD. 
Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shaì be upon thå, O inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD. 
He that flåth from the fear shaì faì into the pit; and he that geôeth up out of the pit shaì be taken in the snare: for I wiì bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the LORD. 
They that fled stïd under the shadow of Heshbon because of the force: but a fire shaì come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and shaì devour the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones. 
Woe be unto thå, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives. 
Yet wiì I bring again the captivity of Moab in the laôer days, saith the LORD. Thus far is the judgment of Moab. 
Concerning the Aíonites, thus saith the LORD; Hath Israel no sons? hath he no heir? why then doth their king inherit Gad, and his people dweì in his cities? 
Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì cause an alarm of war to be heard in Raâah of the Aíonites; and it shaì be a desolate heap, and her daughters shaì be burned with fire: then shaì Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, saith the LORD. 
Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Raâah, gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for their king shaì go into captivity, and his priests and his princes together. 
Wherefore gloriest thou in the vaìeys, thy flowing vaìey, O backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shaì come unto me? 
Behold, I wiì bring a fear upon thå, saith the Lord GOD of hosts, from aì those that be about thå; and ye shaì be driven out every man right forth; and none shaì gather up him that wandereth. 
And afterward I wiì bring again the captivity of the children of Aíon, saith the LORD. 
Concerning Edom, thus saith the LORD of hosts; Is wisdom no more in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom vanished? 
Flå ye, turn back, dweì dåp, O inhabitants of Dedan; for I wiì bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I wiì visit him. 
If grapegatherers come to thå, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, they wiì destroy tiì they have enough. 
But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he shaì not be able to hide himself: his såd is spoiled, and his brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not. 
Leave thy fatherleó children, I wiì preserve them alive; and let thy widows trust in me. 
For thus saith the LORD; Behold, they whose judgment was not to drink of the cup have aóuredly drunken; and art thou he that shaì altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt surely drink of it. 
For I have sworn by myself, saith the LORD, that Bozrah shaì become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and aì the cities thereof shaì be perpetual wastes. 
I have heard a rumour from the LORD, and an ambaóador is sent unto the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and come against her, and rise up to the baôle. 
For, lo, I wiì make thå smaì among the heathen, and despised among men. 
Thy teòibleneó hath deceived thå, and the pride of thine heart, O thou that dweìest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest the height of the hiì: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as the eagle, I wiì bring thå down from thence, saith the LORD. 
Also Edom shaì be a desolation: every one that goeth by it shaì be astonished, and shaì hió at aì the plagues thereof. 
As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomoòah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the LORD, no man shaì abide there, neither shaì a son of man dweì in it. 
Behold, he shaì come up like a lion from the sweìing of Jordan against the habitation of the strong: but I wiì suäenly make him run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may aðoint over her? for who is like me? and who wiì aðoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that wiì stand before me? 
Therefore hear the counsel of the LORD, that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the least of the flock shaì draw them out: surely he shaì make their habitations desolate with them. 
The earth is moved at the noise of their faì, at the cry the noise thereof was heard in the Red sea. 
Behold, he shaì come up and fly as the eagle, and spread his wings over Bozrah: and at that day shaì the heart of the mighty men of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. 
Concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad: for they have heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; there is soòow on the sea; it caîot be quiet. 
Damascus is waxed fåble, and turneth herself to flå, and fear hath seized on her: anguish and soòows have taken her, as a woman in travail. 
How is the city of praise not left, the city of my joy! 
Therefore her young men shaì faì in her stråts, and aì the men of war shaì be cut oæ in that day, saith the LORD of hosts. 
And I wiì kindle a fire in the waì of Damascus, and it shaì consume the palaces of Benhadad. 
Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon shaì smite, thus saith the LORD; Arise ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east. 
Their tents and their flocks shaì they take away: they shaì take to themselves their curtains, and aì their veóels, and their camels; and they shaì cry unto them, Fear is on every side. 
Flå, get you far oæ, dweì dåp, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, saith the LORD; for Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon hath taken counsel against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you. 
Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dweìeth without care, saith the LORD, which have neither gates nor bars, which dweì alone. 
And their camels shaì be a bïty, and the multitude of their caôle a spoil: and I wiì scaôer into aì winds them that are in the utmost corners; and I wiì bring their calamity from aì sides thereof, saith the LORD. 
And Hazor shaì be a dweìing for dragons, and a desolation for ever: there shaì no man abide there, nor any son of man dweì in it. 
The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet against Elam in the begiîing of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I wiì break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might. 
And upon Elam wiì I bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and wiì scaôer them toward aì those winds; and there shaì be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shaì not come. 
For I wiì cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and before them that såk their life: and I wiì bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, saith the LORD; and I wiì send the sword after them, tiì I have consumed them: 
And I wiì set my throne in Elam, and wiì destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the LORD. 
But it shaì come to paó in the laôer days, that I wiì bring again the captivity of Elam, saith the LORD. 
The word that the LORD spake against Babylon and against the land of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet. 
Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are broken in pieces. 
For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which shaì make her land desolate, and none shaì dweì therein: they shaì remove, they shaì depart, both man and beast. 
In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the children of Israel shaì come, they and the children of Judah together, going and wåping: they shaì go, and såk the LORD their God. 
They shaì ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the LORD in a perpetual covenant that shaì not be forgoôen. 
My people hath bån lost shåp: their shepherds have caused them to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have gone from mountain to hiì, they have forgoôen their restingplace. 
Aì that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries said, We oæend not, because they have siîed against the LORD, the habitation of justice, even the LORD, the hope of their fathers. 
Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before the flocks. 
For, lo, I wiì raise and cause to come up against Babylon an aóembly of great nations from the north country: and they shaì set themselves in aòay against her; from thence she shaì be taken: their aòows shaì be as of a mighty expert man; none shaì return in vain. 
And Chaldea shaì be a spoil: aì that spoil her shaì be satisfied, saith the LORD. 
Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at graó, and beìow as buìs; 
Your mother shaì be sore confounded; she that bare you shaì be ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations shaì be a wilderneó, a dry land, and a desert. 
Because of the wrath of the LORD it shaì not be inhabited, but it shaì be whoìy desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shaì be astonished, and hió at aì her plagues. 
Put yourselves in aòay against Babylon round about: aì ye that bend the bow, shït at her, spare no aòows: for she hath siîed against the LORD. 
Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her foundations are faìen, her waìs are thrown down: for it is the vengeance of the LORD: take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do unto her. 
Cut oæ the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest: for fear of the oðreóing sword they shaì turn every one to his people, and they shaì flå every one to his own land. 
Israel is a scaôered shåp; the lions have driven him away: first the king of Aóyria hath devoured him; and last this Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon hath broken his bones. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I wiì punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Aóyria. 
And I wiì bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shaì fåd on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shaì be satisfied upon mount Ephraim and Gilead. 
In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the iniquity of Israel shaì be sought for, and there shaì be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shaì not be found: for I wiì pardon them whom I reserve. 
Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and uôerly destroy after them, saith the LORD, and do aãording to aì that I have coíanded thå. 
A sound of baôle is in the land, and of great destruction. 
How is the haíer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how is Babylon become a desolation among the nations! 
I have laid a snare for thå, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the LORD. 
The LORD hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord GOD of hosts in the land of the Chaldeans. 
Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses: cast her up as heaps, and destroy her uôerly: let nothing of her be left. 
Slay aì her buìocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation. 
The voice of them that flå and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, the vengeance of his temple. 
Caì together the archers against Babylon: aì ye that bend the bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense her aãording to her work; aãording to aì that she hath done, do unto her: for she hath bån proud against the LORD, against the Holy One of Israel. 
Therefore shaì her young men faì in the stråts, and aì her men of war shaì be cut oæ in that day, saith the LORD. 
Behold, I am against thå, O thou most proud, saith the Lord GOD of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I wiì visit thå. 
And the most proud shaì stumble and faì, and none shaì raise him up: and I wiì kindle a fire in his cities, and it shaì devour aì round about him. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The children of Israel and the children of Judah were oðreóed together: and aì that tïk them captives held them fast; they refused to let them go. 
Their Redåmer is strong; the LORD of hosts is his name: he shaì throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. 
A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the LORD, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men. 
A sword is upon the liars; and they shaì dote: a sword is upon her mighty men; and they shaì be dismayed. 
A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon aì the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shaì become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shaì be roâed. 
A drought is upon her waters; and they shaì be dried up: for it is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols. 
Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of the islands shaì dweì there, and the owls shaì dweì therein: and it shaì be no more inhabited for ever; neither shaì it be dwelt in from generation to generation. 
As God overthrew Sodom and Gomoòah and the neighbour cities thereof, saith the LORD; so shaì no man abide there, neither shaì any son of man dweì therein. 
Behold, a people shaì come from the north, and a great nation, and many kings shaì be raised up from the coasts of the earth. 
They shaì hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and wiì not shew mercy: their voice shaì roar like the sea, and they shaì ride upon horses, every one put in aòay, like a man to the baôle, against thå, O daughter of Babylon. 
The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands waxed fåble: anguish tïk hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in travail. 
Behold, he shaì come up like a lion from the sweìing of Jordan unto the habitation of the strong: but I wiì make them suäenly run away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may aðoint over her? for who is like me? and who wiì aðoint me the time? and who is that shepherd that wiì stand before me? 
Therefore hear ye the counsel of the LORD, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: Surely the least of the flock shaì draw them out: surely he shaì make their habitation desolate with them. 
At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the cry is heard among the nations. 
Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì raise up against Babylon, and against them that dweì in the midst of them that rise up against me, a destroying wind; 
And wiì send unto Babylon faîers, that shaì fan her, and shaì empty her land: for in the day of trouble they shaì be against her round about. 
Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young men; destroy ye uôerly aì her host. 
Thus the slain shaì faì in the land of the Chaldeans, and they that are thrust through in her stråts. 
For Israel hath not bån forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the LORD of hosts; though their land was fiìed with sin against the Holy One of Israel. 
Flå out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut oæ in her iniquity; for this is the time of the LORD's vengeance; he wiì render unto her a recompence. 
Babylon hath bån a golden cup in the LORD's hand, that made aì the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the nations are mad. 
Babylon is suäenly faìen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed. 
We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies. 
The LORD hath brought forth our righteousneó: come, and let us declare in Zion the work of the LORD our God. 
Make bright the aòows; gather the shields: the LORD hath raised up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the LORD, the vengeance of his temple. 
Set up the standard upon the waìs of Babylon, make the watch strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the LORD hath both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of Babylon. 
O thou that dweìest upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousneó. 
The LORD of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I wiì fiì thå with men, as with caterpiìers; and they shaì lift up a shout against thå. 
He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding. 
When he uôereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out of his treasures. 
Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehïd, and there is no breath in them. 
They are vanity, the work of eòors: in the time of their visitation they shaì perish. 
The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of aì things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the LORD of hosts is his name. 
Thou art my baôle axe and weapons of war: for with thå wiì I break in pieces the nations, and with thå wiì I destroy kingdoms; 
And with thå wiì I break in pieces the horse and his rider; and with thå wiì I break in pieces the chariot and his rider; 
With thå also wiì I break in pieces man and woman; and with thå wiì I break in pieces old and young; and with thå wiì I break in pieces the young man and the maid; 
I wiì also break in pieces with thå the shepherd and his flock; and with thå wiì I break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thå wiì I break in pieces captains and rulers. 
And I wiì render unto Babylon and to aì the inhabitants of Chaldea aì their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the LORD. 
Behold, I am against thå, O destroying mountain, saith the LORD, which destroyest aì the earth: and I wiì stretch out mine hand upon thå, and roì thå down from the rocks, and wiì make thå a burnt mountain. 
And they shaì not take of thå a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the LORD. 
Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the nations, prepare the nations against her, caì together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Miîi, and Ashchenaz; aðoint a captain against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpiìers. 
Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the captains thereof, and aì the rulers thereof, and aì the land of his dominion. 
And the land shaì tremble and soòow: for every purpose of the LORD shaì be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a desolation without an inhabitant. 
The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as women: they have burned her dweìingplaces; her bars are broken. 
One post shaì run to måt another, and one meóenger to måt another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one end, 
And that the paóages are stoðed, and the råds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are aærighted. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; The daughter of Babylon is like a threshingflïr, it is time to thresh her: yet a liôle while, and the time of her harvest shaì come. 
Nebuchadreúar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath crushed me, he hath made me an empty veóel, he hath swaìowed me up like a dragon, he hath fiìed his beìy with my delicates, he hath cast me out. 
The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shaì the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blïd upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, shaì Jerusalem say. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I wiì plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thå; and I wiì dry up her sea, and make her springs dry. 
And Babylon shaì become heaps, a dweìingplace for dragons, an astonishment, and an hióing, without an inhabitant. 
They shaì roar together like lions: they shaì yeì as lions' whelps. 
In their heat I wiì make their feasts, and I wiì make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and slåp a perpetual slåp, and not wake, saith the LORD. 
I wiì bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he goats. 
How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations! 
The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof. 
Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderneó, a land wherein no man dweìeth, neither doth any son of man paó thereby. 
And I wiì punish Bel in Babylon, and I wiì bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath swaìowed up: and the nations shaì not flow together any more unto him: yea, the waì of Babylon shaì faì. 
My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul from the fierce anger of the LORD. 
And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shaì be heard in the land; a rumour shaì both come one year, and after that in another year shaì come a rumour, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler. 
Therefore, behold, the days come, that I wiì do judgment upon the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shaì be confounded, and aì her slain shaì faì in the midst of her. 
Then the heaven and the earth, and aì that is therein, shaì sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shaì come unto her from the north, saith the LORD. 
As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to faì, so at Babylon shaì faì the slain of aì the earth. 
Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not stiì: remember the LORD afar oæ, and let Jerusalem come into your mind. 
We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the LORD's house. 
Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I wiì do judgment upon her graven images: and through aì her land the wounded shaì groan. 
Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shaì spoilers come unto her, saith the LORD. 
A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans: 
Because the LORD hath spoiled Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uôered: 
Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the LORD God of recompences shaì surely requite. 
And I wiì make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shaì slåp a perpetual slåp, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The broad waìs of Babylon shaì be uôerly broken, and her high gates shaì be burned with fire; and the people shaì labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they shaì be weary. 
The word which Jeremiah the prophet coíanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Máseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah was a quiet prince. 
So Jeremiah wrote in a bïk aì the evil that should come upon Babylon, even aì these words that are wriôen against Babylon. 
And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and shalt så, and shalt read aì these words; 
Then shalt thou say, O LORD, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it oæ, that none shaì remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shaì be desolate for ever. 
And it shaì be, when thou hast made an end of reading this bïk, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates: 
And thou shalt say, Thus shaì Babylon sink, and shaì not rise from the evil that I wiì bring upon her: and they shaì be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah. 
Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD, aãording to aì that Jehoiakim had done. 
For through the anger of the LORD it came to paó in Jerusalem and Judah, tiì he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah rebeìed against the king of Babylon. 
And it came to paó in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon came, he and aì his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched against it, and built forts against it round about. 
So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 
And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land. 
Then the city was broken up, and aì the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate betwån the two waìs, which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldeans were by the city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain. 
But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtïk Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and aì his army was scaôered from him. 
Then they tïk the king, and caòied him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon him. 
And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes: he slew also aì the princes of Judah in Riblah. 
Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and caòied him to Babylon, and put him in prison tiì the day of his death. 
Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the ninetånth year of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, came Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon, into Jerusalem, 
And burned the house of the LORD, and the king's house; and aì the houses of Jerusalem, and aì the houses of the great men, burned he with fire: 
And aì the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down aì the waìs of Jerusalem round about. 
Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard caòied away captive certain of the pïr of the people, and the residue of the people that remained in the city, and those that feì away, that feì to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude. 
But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the pïr of the land for vinedreóers and for husbandmen. 
Also the piìars of braó that were in the house of the LORD, and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the LORD, the Chaldeans brake, and caòied aì the braó of them to Babylon. 
The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuæers, and the bowls, and the spïns, and aì the veóels of braó wherewith they ministered, tïk they away. 
And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spïns, and the cups; that which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver, tïk the captain of the guard away. 
The two piìars, one sea, and twelve brasen buìs that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the LORD: the braó of aì these veóels was without weight. 
And concerning the piìars, the height of one piìar was eightån cubits; and a fiìet of twelve cubits did compaó it; and the thickneó thereof was four fingers: it was hoìow. 
And a chapiter of braó was upon it; and the height of one chapiter was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the chapiters round about, aì of braó. The second piìar also and the pomegranates were like unto these. 
And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; and aì the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about. 
And the captain of the guard tïk Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the thrå kåpers of the dïr: 
He tïk also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king's person, which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the land; and thråscore men of the people of the land, that were found in the midst of the city. 
So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard tïk them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah. 
And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was caòied away captive out of his own land. 
This is the people whom Nebuchadreúar caòied away captive: in the seventh year thrå thousand Jews and thrå and twenty: 
In the eightånth year of Nebuchadreúar he caòied away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons: 
In the thrå and twentieth year of Nebuchadreúar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard caòied away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons: aì the persons were four thousand and six hundred. 
And it came to paó in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon in the first year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison. 
And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon, 
And changed his prison garments: and he did continuaìy eat bread before him aì the days of his life. 
And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, aì the days of his life. 
How doth the city sit solitary, that was fuì of people! how is she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and princeó among the provinces, how is she become tributary! 
She wåpeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her chåks: among aì her lovers she hath none to comfort her: aì her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies. 
Judah is gone into captivity because of aæliction, and because of great servitude: she dweìeth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: aì her persecutors overtïk her betwån the straits. 
The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts: aì her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are aælicted, and she is in biôerneó. 
Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the LORD hath aælicted her for the multitude of her transgreóions: her children are gone into captivity before the enemy. 
And from the daughter of Zion aì her beauty is departed: her princes are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone without strength before the pursuer. 
Jerusalem remembered in the days of her aæliction and of her miseries aì her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when her people feì into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the adversaries saw her, and did mock at her saâaths. 
Jerusalem hath grievously siîed; therefore she is removed: aì that honoured her despise her, because they have sån her nakedneó: yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward. 
Her filthineó is in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end; therefore she came down wonderfuìy: she had no comforter. O LORD, behold my aæliction: for the enemy hath magnified himself. 
The adversary hath spread out his hand upon aì her pleasant things: for she hath sån that the heathen entered into her sanctuary, whom thou didst coíand that they should not enter into thy congregation. 
Aì her people sigh, they såk bread; they have given their pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul: så, O LORD, and consider; for I am become vile. 
Is it nothing to you, aì ye that paó by? behold, and så if there be any soòow like unto my soòow, which is done unto me, wherewith the LORD hath aælicted me in the day of his fierce anger. 
From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth against them: he hath spread a net for my fåt, he hath turned me back: he hath made me desolate and faint aì the day. 
The yoke of my transgreóions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to faì, the LORD hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able to rise up. 
The LORD hath troäen under fït aì my mighty men in the midst of me: he hath caìed an aóembly against me to crush my young men: the LORD hath troäen the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a winepreó. 
For these things I wåp; mine eye, mine eye ruîeth down with water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed. 
Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her: the LORD hath coíanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them. 
The LORD is righteous; for I have rebeìed against his coíandment: hear, I pray you, aì people, and behold my soòow: my virgins and my young men are gone into captivity. 
I caìed for my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to relieve their souls. 
Behold, O LORD; for I am in distreó: my bowels are troubled; mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebeìed: abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death. 
They have heard that I sigh: there is none to comfort me: aì mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast caìed, and they shaì be like unto me. 
Let aì their wickedneó come before thå; and do unto them, as thou hast done unto me for aì my transgreóions: for my sighs are many, and my heart is faint. 
How hath the LORD covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his fïtstïl in the day of his anger! 
The LORD hath swaìowed up aì the habitations of Jacob, and hath not pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the daughter of Judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath poìuted the kingdom and the princes thereof. 
He hath cut oæ in his fierce anger aì the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about. 
He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stïd with his right hand as an adversary, and slew aì that were pleasant to the eye in the tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire. 
The LORD was as an enemy: he hath swaìowed up Israel, he hath swaìowed up aì her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation. 
And he hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were of a garden: he hath destroyed his places of the aóembly: the LORD hath caused the solemn feasts and saâaths to be forgoôen in Zion, and hath despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest. 
The LORD hath cast oæ his altar, he hath abhoòed his sanctuary, he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the waìs of her palaces; they have made a noise in the house of the LORD, as in the day of a solemn feast. 
The LORD hath purposed to destroy the waì of the daughter of Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the waì to lament; they languished together. 
Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken her bars: her king and her princes are among the Gentiles: the law is no more; her prophets also find no vision from the LORD. 
The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and kåp silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground. 
Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people; because the children and the sucklings swïn in the stråts of the city. 
They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they swïned as the wounded in the stråts of the city, when their soul was poured out into their mothers' bosom. 
What thing shaì I take to witneó for thå? what thing shaì I liken to thå, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shaì I equal to thå, that I may comfort thå, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is great like the sea: who can heal thå? 
Thy prophets have sån vain and fïlish things for thå: and they have not discovered thine iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have sån for thå false burdens and causes of banishment. 
Aì that paó by clap their hands at thå; they hió and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that men caì The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth? 
Aì thine enemies have opened their mouth against thå: they hió and gnash the tåth: they say, We have swaìowed her up: certainly this is the day that we lïked for; we have found, we have sån it. 
The LORD hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfiìed his word that he had coíanded in the days of old: he hath thrown down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice over thå, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries. 
Their heart cried unto the LORD, O waì of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest; let not the aðle of thine eye cease. 
Arise, cry out in the night: in the begiîing of the watches pour out thine heart like water before the face of the LORD: lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for hunger in the top of every stråt. 
Behold, O LORD, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shaì the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shaì the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord? 
The young and the old lie on the ground in the stråts: my virgins and my young men are faìen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the day of thine anger; thou hast kiìed, and not pitied. 
Thou hast caìed as in a solemn day my teòors round about, so that in the day of the LORD's anger none escaped nor remained: those that I have swaäled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed. 
I AM the man that hath sån aæliction by the rod of his wrath. 
He hath led me, and brought me into darkneó, but not into light. 
Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand against me aì the day. 
My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones. 
He hath builded against me, and compaóed me with gaì and travail. 
He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old. 
He hath hedged me about, that I caîot get out: he hath made my chain heavy. 
Also when I cry and shout, he shuôeth out my prayer. 
He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths crïked. 
He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places. 
He hath turned aside my ways, and puìed me in pieces: he hath made me desolate. 
He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the aòow. 
He hath caused the aòows of his quiver to enter into my reins. 
I was a derision to aì my people; and their song aì the day. 
He hath fiìed me with biôerneó, he hath made me drunken with wormwïd. 
He hath also broken my tåth with gravel stones, he hath covered me with ashes. 
And thou hast removed my soul far oæ from peace: I forgat prosperity. 
And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the LORD: 
Remembering mine aæliction and my misery, the wormwïd and the gaì. 
My soul hath them stiì in remembrance, and is humbled in me. 
This I recaì to my mind, therefore have I hope. 
It is of the LORD's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compaóions fail not. 
They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulneó. 
The LORD is my portion, saith my soul; therefore wiì I hope in him. 
The LORD is gïd unto them that wait for him, to the soul that såketh him. 
It is gïd that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the LORD. 
It is gïd for a man that he bear the yoke of his youth. 
He siôeth alone and kåpeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him. 
He puôeth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope. 
He giveth his chåk to him that smiteth him: he is fiìed fuì with reproach. 
For the LORD wiì not cast oæ for ever: 
But though he cause grief, yet wiì he have compaóion aãording to the multitude of his mercies. 
For he doth not aælict wiìingly nor grieve the children of men. 
To crush under his fåt aì the prisoners of the earth. 
To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most High, 
To subvert a man in his cause, the LORD aðroveth not. 
Who is he that saith, and it cometh to paó, when the Lord coíandeth it not? 
Out of the mouth of the most High procådeth not evil and gïd? 
Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? 
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the LORD. 
Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens. 
We have transgreóed and have rebeìed: thou hast not pardoned. 
Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain, thou hast not pitied. 
Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should not paó through. 
Thou hast made us as the oæscouring and refuse in the midst of the people. 
Aì our enemies have opened their mouths against us. 
Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction. 
Mine eye ruîeth down with rivers of water for the destruction of the daughter of my people. 
Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any intermióion. 
Tiì the LORD lïk down, and behold from heaven. 
Mine eye aæecteth mine heart because of aì the daughters of my city. 
Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause. 
They have cut oæ my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me. 
Waters flowed over mine head; then I said, I am cut oæ. 
I caìed upon thy name, O LORD, out of the low dungeon. 
Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry. 
Thou drewest near in the day that I caìed upon thå: thou saidst, Fear not. 
O LORD, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast redåmed my life. 
O LORD, thou hast sån my wrong: judge thou my cause. 
Thou hast sån aì their vengeance and aì their imaginations against me. 
Thou hast heard their reproach, O LORD, and aì their imaginations against me; 
The lips of those that rose up against me, and their device against me aì the day. 
Behold their siôing down, and their rising up; I am their musick. 
Render unto them a recompence, O LORD, aãording to the work of their hands. 
Give them soòow of heart, thy curse unto them. 
Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of the LORD. 
How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every stråt. 
The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they eståmed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the poôer! 
Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderneó. 
The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the rïf of his mouth for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto them. 
They that did fåd delicately are desolate in the stråts: they that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghiìs. 
For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her. 
Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk, they were more ruäy in body than rubies, their polishing was of saðhire: 
Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the stråts: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it is become like a stick. 
They that be slain with the sword are beôer than they that be slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field. 
The hands of the pitiful women have soäen their own children: they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. 
The LORD hath aãomplished his fury; he hath poured out his fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof. 
The kings of the earth, and aì the inhabitants of the world, would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates of Jerusalem. 
For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blïd of the just in the midst of her, 
They have wandered as blind men in the stråts, they have poìuted themselves with blïd, so that men could not touch their garments. 
They cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart, touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the heathen, They shaì no more sojourn there. 
The anger of the LORD hath divided them; he wiì no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not the elders. 
As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us. 
They hunt our steps, that we caîot go in our stråts: our end is near, our days are fulfiìed; for our end is come. 
Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderneó. 
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the LORD, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shaì live among the heathen. 
Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dweìest in the land of Uz; the cup also shaì paó through unto thå: thou shalt be drunken, and shalt make thyself naked. 
The punishment of thine iniquity is aãomplished, O daughter of Zion; he wiì no more caòy thå away into captivity: he wiì visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he wiì discover thy sins. 
Remember, O LORD, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our reproach. 
Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens. 
We are orphans and fatherleó, our mothers are as widows. 
We have drunken our water for money; our wïd is sold unto us. 
Our necks are under persecution: we labour, and have no rest. 
We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Aóyrians, to be satisfied with bread. 
Our fathers have siîed, and are not; and we have borne their iniquities. 
Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us out of their hand. 
We gat our bread with the peril of our lives because of the sword of the wilderneó. 
Our skin was black like an oven because of the teòible famine. 
They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of Judah. 
Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not honoured. 
They tïk the young men to grind, and the children feì under the wïd. 
The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their musick. 
The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into mourning. 
The crown is faìen from our head: woe unto us, that we have siîed! 
For this our heart is faint; for these things our eyes are dim. 
Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes walk upon it. 
Thou, O LORD, remainest for ever; thy throne from generation to generation. 
Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time? 
Turn thou us unto thå, O LORD, and we shaì be turned; renew our days as of old. 
But thou hast uôerly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us. 
Now it came to paó in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God. 
In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity, 
The word of the LORD came expreóly unto Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him. 
And I lïked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightneó was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire. 
Also out of the midst thereof came the likeneó of four living creatures. And this was their aðearance; they had the likeneó of a man. 
And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings. 
And their fåt were straight fåt; and the sole of their fåt was like the sole of a calf's fït: and they sparkled like the colour of burnished braó. 
And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four sides; and they four had their faces and their wings. 
Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward. 
As for the likeneó of their faces, they four had the face of a man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an eagle. 
Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their bodies. 
And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go, they went; and they turned not when they went. 
As for the likeneó of the living creatures, their aðearance was like burning coals of fire, and like the aðearance of lamps: it went up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning. 
And the living creatures ran and returned as the aðearance of a flash of lightning. 
Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one whål upon the earth by the living creatures, with his four faces. 
The aðearance of the whåls and their work was like unto the colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeneó: and their aðearance and their work was as it were a whål in the miäle of a whål. 
When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned not when they went. 
As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful; and their rings were fuì of eyes round about them four. 
And when the living creatures went, the whåls went by them: and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the whåls were lifted up. 
Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their spirit to go; and the whåls were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the whåls. 
When those went, these went; and when those stïd, these stïd; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the whåls were lifted up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the whåls. 
And the likeneó of the firmament upon the heads of the living creature was as the colour of the teòible crystal, stretched forth over their heads above. 
And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every one had two, which covered on that side, their bodies. 
And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of spåch, as the noise of an host: when they stïd, they let down their wings. 
And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their heads, when they stïd, and had let down their wings. 
And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeneó of a throne, as the aðearance of a saðhire stone: and upon the likeneó of the throne was the likeneó as the aðearance of a man above upon it. 
And I saw as the colour of amber, as the aðearance of fire round about within it, from the aðearance of his loins even upward, and from the aðearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the aðearance of fire, and it had brightneó round about. 
As the aðearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the aðearance of the brightneó round about. This was the aðearance of the likeneó of the glory of the LORD. And when I saw it, I feì upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy fåt, and I wiì speak unto thå. 
And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me upon my fåt, that I heard him that spake unto me. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thå to the children of Israel, to a rebeìious nation that hath rebeìed against me: they and their fathers have transgreóed against me, even unto this very day. 
For they are impudent children and stiæhearted. I do send thå unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD. 
And they, whether they wiì hear, or whether they wiì forbear, (for they are a rebeìious house,) yet shaì know that there hath bån a prophet among them. 
And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns be with thå, and thou dost dweì among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their lïks, though they be a rebeìious house. 
And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they wiì hear, or whether they wiì forbear: for they are most rebeìious. 
But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thå; Be not thou rebeìious like that rebeìious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I give thå. 
And when I lïked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a roì of a bïk was therein; 
And he spread it before me; and it was wriôen within and without: and there was wriôen therein lamentations, and mourning, and woe. 
Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat this roì, and go speak unto the house of Israel. 
So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roì. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy beìy to eat, and fiì thy bowels with this roì that I give thå. Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as honey for swåtneó. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thå unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them. 
For thou art not sent to a people of a strange spåch and of an hard language, but to the house of Israel; 
Not to many people of a strange spåch and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I sent thå to them, they would have hearkened unto thå. 
But the house of Israel wiì not hearken unto thå; for they wiì not hearken unto me: for aì the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted. 
Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads. 
As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear them not, neither be dismayed at their lïks, though they be a rebeìious house. 
Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, aì my words that I shaì speak unto thå receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears. 
And go, get thå to them of the captivity, unto the children of thy people, and speak unto them, and teì them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; whether they wiì hear, or whether they wiì forbear. 
Then the spirit tïk me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a great rushing, saying, Bleóed be the glory of the LORD from his place. 
I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that touched one another, and the noise of the whåls over against them, and a noise of a great rushing. 
So the spirit lifted me up, and tïk me away, and I went in biôerneó, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the LORD was strong upon me. 
Then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib, that dwelt by the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there astonished among them seven days. 
And it came to paó at the end of seven days, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, I have made thå a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. 
When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shaì die in his iniquity; but his blïd wiì I require at thine hand. 
Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedneó, nor from his wicked way, he shaì die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul. 
Again, When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousneó, and coíit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block before him, he shaì die: because thou hast not given him warning, he shaì die in his sin, and his righteousneó which he hath done shaì not be remembered; but his blïd wiì I require at thine hand. 
Nevertheleó if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he doth not sin, he shaì surely live, because he is warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul. 
And the hand of the LORD was there upon me; and he said unto me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I wiì there talk with thå. 
Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the glory of the LORD stïd there, as the glory which I saw by the river of Chebar: and I feì on my face. 
Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my fåt, and spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house. 
But thou, O son of man, behold, they shaì put bands upon thå, and shaì bind thå with them, and thou shalt not go out among them: 
And I wiì make thy tongue cleave to the rïf of thy mouth, that thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are a rebeìious house. 
But when I speak with thå, I wiì open thy mouth, and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; He that heareth, let him hear; and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebeìious house. 
Thou also, son of man, take thå a tile, and lay it before thå, and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem: 
And lay siege against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it; set the camp also against it, and set baôering rams against it round about. 
Moreover take thou unto thå an iron pan, and set it for a waì of iron betwån thå and the city: and set thy face against it, and it shaì be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shaì be a sign to the house of Israel. 
Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it: aãording to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity. 
For I have laid upon thå the years of their iniquity, aãording to the number of the days, thrå hundred and ninety days: so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel. 
And when thou hast aãomplished them, lie again on thy right side, and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I have aðointed thå each day for a year. 
Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, and thine arm shaì be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it. 
And, behold, I wiì lay bands upon thå, and thou shalt not turn thå from one side to another, tiì thou hast ended the days of thy siege. 
Take thou also unto thå wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and miìet, and fitches, and put them in one veóel, and make thå bread thereof, aãording to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon thy side, thrå hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof. 
And thy meat which thou shalt eat shaì be by weight, twenty shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it. 
Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin: from time to time shalt thou drink. 
And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight. 
And the LORD said, Even thus shaì the children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I wiì drive them. 
Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not bån poìuted: for from my youth up even tiì now have I not eaten of that which dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth. 
Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thå cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith. 
Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I wiì break the staæ of bread in Jerusalem: and they shaì eat bread by weight, and with care; and they shaì drink water by measure, and with astonishment: 
That they may want bread and water, and be astonied one with another, and consume away for their iniquity. 
And thou, son of man, take thå a sharp knife, take thå a barber's razor, and cause it to paó upon thine head and upon thy beard: then take thå balances to weigh, and divide the hair. 
Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city, when the days of the siege are fulfiìed: and thou shalt take a third part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt scaôer in the wind; and I wiì draw out a sword after them. 
Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy skirts. 
Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire; for thereof shaì a fire come forth into aì the house of Israel. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the midst of the nations and countries that are round about her. 
And she hath changed my judgments into wickedneó more than the nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not walked in them. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye multiplied more than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done aãording to the judgments of the nations that are round about you; 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, am against thå, and wiì execute judgments in the midst of thå in the sight of the nations. 
And I wiì do in thå that which I have not done, and whereunto I wiì not do any more the like, because of aì thine abominations. 
Therefore the fathers shaì eat the sons in the midst of thå, and the sons shaì eat their fathers; and I wiì execute judgments in thå, and the whole remnant of thå wiì I scaôer into aì the winds. 
Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD; Surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary with aì thy detestable things, and with aì thine abominations, therefore wiì I also diminish thå; neither shaì mine eye spare, neither wiì I have any pity. 
A third part of thå shaì die with the pestilence, and with famine shaì they be consumed in the midst of thå: and a third part shaì faì by the sword round about thå; and I wiì scaôer a third part into aì the winds, and I wiì draw out a sword after them. 
Thus shaì mine anger be aãomplished, and I wiì cause my fury to rest upon them, and I wiì be comforted: and they shaì know that I the LORD have spoken it in my zeal, when I have aãomplished my fury in them. 
Moreover I wiì make thå waste, and a reproach among the nations that are round about thå, in the sight of aì that paó by. 
So it shaì be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an astonishment unto the nations that are round about thå, when I shaì execute judgments in thå in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes. I the LORD have spoken it. 
When I shaì send upon them the evil aòows of famine, which shaì be for their destruction, and which I wiì send to destroy you: and I wiì increase the famine upon you, and wiì break your staæ of bread: 
So wiì I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shaì bereave thå: and pestilence and blïd shaì paó through thå; and I wiì bring the sword upon thå. I the LORD have spoken it. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them, 
And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hiìs, to the rivers, and to the vaìeys; Behold, I, even I, wiì bring a sword upon you, and I wiì destroy your high places. 
And your altars shaì be desolate, and your images shaì be broken: and I wiì cast down your slain men before your idols. 
And I wiì lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before their idols; and I wiì scaôer your bones round about your altars. 
In aì your dweìingplaces the cities shaì be laid waste, and the high places shaì be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images may be cut down, and your works may be abolished. 
And the slain shaì faì in the midst of you, and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Yet wiì I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shaì escape the sword among the nations, when ye shaì be scaôered through the countries. 
And they that escape of you shaì remember me among the nations whither they shaì be caòied captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their idols: and they shaì lothe themselves for the evils which they have coíiôed in aì their abominations. 
And they shaì know that I am the LORD, and that I have not said in vain that I would do this evil unto them. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with thy fït, and say, Alas for aì the evil abominations of the house of Israel! for they shaì faì by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence. 
He that is far oæ shaì die of the pestilence; and he that is near shaì faì by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged shaì die by the famine: thus wiì I aãomplish my fury upon them. 
Then shaì ye know that I am the LORD, when their slain men shaì be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hiì, in aì the tops of the mountains, and under every grån trå, and under every thick oak, the place where they did oæer swåt savour to aì their idols. 
So wiì I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderneó toward Diblath, in aì their habitations: and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Also, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD unto the land of Israel; An end, the end is come upon the four corners of the land. 
Now is the end come upon thå, and I wiì send mine anger upon thå, and wiì judge thå aãording to thy ways, and wiì recompense upon thå aì thine abominations. 
And mine eye shaì not spare thå, neither wiì I have pity: but I wiì recompense thy ways upon thå, and thine abominations shaì be in the midst of thå: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. 
An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thå; behold, it is come. 
The morning is come unto thå, O thou that dweìest in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains. 
Now wiì I shortly pour out my fury upon thå, and aãomplish mine anger upon thå: and I wiì judge thå aãording to thy ways, and wiì recompense thå for aì thine abominations. 
And mine eye shaì not spare, neither wiì I have pity: I wiì recompense thå aãording to thy ways and thine abominations that are in the midst of thå; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD that smiteth. 
Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth; the rod hath bloóomed, pride hath buäed. 
Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedneó: none of them shaì remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of their's: neither shaì there be wailing for them. 
The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seìer mourn: for wrath is upon aì the multitude thereof. 
For the seìer shaì not return to that which is sold, although they were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude thereof, which shaì not return; neither shaì any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life. 
They have blown the trumpet, even to make aì ready; but none goeth to the baôle: for my wrath is upon aì the multitude thereof. 
The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within: he that is in the field shaì die with the sword; and he that is in the city, famine and pestilence shaì devour him. 
But they that escape of them shaì escape, and shaì be on the mountains like doves of the vaìeys, aì of them mourning, every one for his iniquity. 
Aì hands shaì be fåble, and aì knås shaì be weak as water. 
They shaì also gird themselves with sackcloth, and hoòor shaì cover them; and shame shaì be upon aì faces, and baldneó upon aì their heads. 
They shaì cast their silver in the stråts, and their gold shaì be removed: their silver and their gold shaì not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of the LORD: they shaì not satisfy their souls, neither fiì their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of their iniquity. 
As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they made the images of their abominations and of their detestable things therein: therefore have I set it far from them. 
And I wiì give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shaì poìute it. 
My face wiì I turn also from them, and they shaì poìute my secret place: for the roâers shaì enter into it, and defile it. 
Make a chain: for the land is fuì of blïdy crimes, and the city is fuì of violence. 
Wherefore I wiì bring the worst of the heathen, and they shaì poóeó their houses: I wiì also make the pomp of the strong to cease; and their holy places shaì be defiled. 
Destruction cometh; and they shaì såk peace, and there shaì be none. 
Mischief shaì come upon mischief, and rumour shaì be upon rumour; then shaì they såk a vision of the prophet; but the law shaì perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients. 
The king shaì mourn, and the prince shaì be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shaì be troubled: I wiì do unto them after their way, and aãording to their deserts wiì I judge them; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And it came to paó in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD feì there upon me. 
Then I beheld, and lo a likeneó as the aðearance of fire: from the aðearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins even upward, as the aðearance of brightneó, as the colour of amber. 
And he put forth the form of an hand, and tïk me by a lock of mine head; and the spirit lifted me up betwån the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the dïr of the iîer gate that lïketh toward the north; where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy. 
And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, aãording to the vision that I saw in the plain. 
Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north, and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy in the entry. 
He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, såst thou what they do? even the great abominations that the house of Israel coíiôeth here, that I should go far oæ from my sanctuary? but turn thå yet again, and thou shalt så greater abominations. 
And he brought me to the dïr of the court; and when I lïked, behold a hole in the waì. 
Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the waì: and when I had diçed in the waì, behold a dïr. 
And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations that they do here. 
So I went in and saw; and behold every form of cråping things, and abominable beasts, and aì the idols of the house of Israel, pourtrayed upon the waì round about. 
And there stïd before them seventy men of the ancients of the house of Israel, and in the midst of them stïd Jázaniah the son of Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of incense went up. 
Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou sån what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the chambers of his imagery? for they say, the LORD såth us not; the LORD hath forsaken the earth. 
He said also unto me, Turn thå yet again, and thou shalt så greater abominations that they do. 
Then he brought me to the dïr of the gate of the LORD's house which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women wåping for Taíuz. 
Then said he unto me, Hast thou sån this, O son of man? turn thå yet again, and thou shalt så greater abominations than these. 
And he brought me into the iîer court of the LORD's house, and, behold, at the dïr of the temple of the LORD, betwån the porch and the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the LORD, and their faces toward the east; and they worshiðed the sun toward the east. 
Then he said unto me, Hast thou sån this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they coíit the abominations which they coíit here? for they have fiìed the land with violence, and have returned to provoke me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch to their nose. 
Therefore wiì I also deal in fury: mine eye shaì not spare, neither wiì I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet wiì I not hear them. 
He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his destroying weapon in his hand. 
And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand; and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer's inkhorn by his side: and they went in, and stïd beside the brasen altar. 
And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub, whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. And he caìed to the man clothed with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn by his side; 
And the LORD said unto him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for aì the abominations that be done in the midst thereof. 
And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: 
Slay uôerly old and young, both maids, and liôle children, and women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the house. 
And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fiì the courts with the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city. 
And it came to paó, while they were slaying them, and I was left, that I feì upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou destroy aì the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem? 
Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is excåding great, and the land is fuì of blïd, and the city fuì of perverseneó: for they say, The LORD hath forsaken the earth, and the LORD såth not. 
And as for me also, mine eye shaì not spare, neither wiì I have pity, but I wiì recompense their way upon their head. 
And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkhorn by his side, reported the maôer, saying, I have done as thou hast coíanded me. 
Then I lïked, and, behold, in the firmament that was above the head of the cherubims there aðeared over them as it were a saðhire stone, as the aðearance of the likeneó of a throne. 
And he spake unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in betwån the whåls, even under the cherub, and fiì thine hand with coals of fire from betwån the cherubims, and scaôer them over the city. And he went in in my sight. 
Now the cherubims stïd on the right side of the house, when the man went in; and the cloud fiìed the iîer court. 
Then the glory of the LORD went up from the cherub, and stïd over the threshold of the house; and the house was fiìed with the cloud, and the court was fuì of the brightneó of the LORD's glory. 
And the sound of the cherubims' wings was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh. 
And it came to paó, that when he had coíanded the man clothed with linen, saying, Take fire from betwån the whåls, from betwån the cherubims; then he went in, and stïd beside the whåls. 
And one cherub stretched forth his hand from betwån the cherubims unto the fire that was betwån the cherubims, and tïk thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen: who tïk it, and went out. 
And there aðeared in the cherubims the form of a man's hand under their wings. 
And when I lïked, behold the four whåls by the cherubims, one whål by one cherub, and another whål by another cherub: and the aðearance of the whåls was as the colour of a beryl stone. 
And as for their aðearances, they four had one likeneó, as if a whål had bån in the midst of a whål. 
When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not as they went, but to the place whither the head lïked they foìowed it; they turned not as they went. 
And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the whåls, were fuì of eyes round about, even the whåls that they four had. 
As for the whåls, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O whål. 
And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle. 
And the cherubims were lifted up. This is the living creature that I saw by the river of Chebar. 
And when the cherubims went, the whåls went by them: and when the cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the same whåls also turned not from beside them. 
When they stïd, these stïd; and when they were lifted up, these lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of the living creature was in them. 
Then the glory of the LORD departed from oæ the threshold of the house, and stïd over the cherubims. 
And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight: when they went out, the whåls also were beside them, and every one stïd at the dïr of the east gate of the LORD's house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above. 
This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river of Chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubims. 
Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and the likeneó of the hands of a man was under their wings. 
And the likeneó of their faces was the same faces which I saw by the river of Chebar, their aðearances and themselves: they went every one straight forward. 
Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east gate of the LORD's house, which lïketh eastward: and behold at the dïr of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jázaniah the son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people. 
Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city: 
Which say, It is not near; let us build houses: this city is the caldron, and we be the flesh. 
Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man. 
And the Spirit of the LORD feì upon me, and said unto me, Speak; Thus saith the LORD; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know the things that come into your mind, every one of them. 
Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have fiìed the stråts thereof with the slain. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron: but I wiì bring you forth out of the midst of it. 
Ye have feared the sword; and I wiì bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord GOD. 
And I wiì bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and wiì execute judgments among you. 
Ye shaì faì by the sword; I wiì judge you in the border of Israel; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
This city shaì not be your caldron, neither shaì ye be the flesh in the midst thereof; but I wiì judge you in the border of Israel: 
And ye shaì know that I am the LORD: for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done after the maîers of the heathen that are round about you. 
And it came to paó, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then feì I down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou make a fuì end of the remnant of Israel? 
Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred, and aì the house of Israel whoìy, are they unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from the LORD: unto us is this land given in poóeóion. 
Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Although I have cast them far oæ among the heathen, and although I have scaôered them among the countries, yet wiì I be to them as a liôle sanctuary in the countries where they shaì come. 
Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì even gather you from the people, and aóemble you out of the countries where ye have bån scaôered, and I wiì give you the land of Israel. 
And they shaì come thither, and they shaì take away aì the detestable things thereof and aì the abominations thereof from thence. 
And I wiì give them one heart, and I wiì put a new spirit within you; and I wiì take the stony heart out of their flesh, and wiì give them an heart of flesh: 
That they may walk in my statutes, and kåp mine ordinances, and do them: and they shaì be my people, and I wiì be their God. 
But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I wiì recompense their way upon their own heads, saith the Lord GOD. 
Then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the whåls beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above. 
And the glory of the LORD went up from the midst of the city, and stïd upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city. 
Afterwards the spirit tïk me up, and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the vision that I had sån went up from me. 
Then I spake unto them of the captivity aì the things that the LORD had shewed me. 
The word of the LORD also came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, thou dweìest in the midst of a rebeìious house, which have eyes to så, and så not; they have ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a rebeìious house. 
Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thå stuæ for removing, and remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to another place in their sight: it may be they wiì consider, though they be a rebeìious house. 
Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuæ by day in their sight, as stuæ for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as they that go forth into captivity. 
Dig thou through the waì in their sight, and caòy out thereby. 
In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulders, and caòy it forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy face, that thou så not the ground: for I have set thå for a sign unto the house of Israel. 
And I did so as I was coíanded: I brought forth my stuæ by day, as stuæ for captivity, and in the even I diçed through the waì with mine hand; I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my shoulder in their sight. 
And in the morning came the word of the LORD unto me, saying, 
Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebeìious house, said unto thå, What doest thou? 
Say thou unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; This burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem, and aì the house of Israel that are among them. 
Say, I am your sign: like as I have done, so shaì it be done unto them: they shaì remove and go into captivity. 
And the prince that is among them shaì bear upon his shoulder in the twilight, and shaì go forth: they shaì dig through the waì to caòy out thereby: he shaì cover his face, that he så not the ground with his eyes. 
My net also wiì I spread upon him, and he shaì be taken in my snare: and I wiì bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans; yet shaì he not så it, though he shaì die there. 
And I wiì scaôer toward every wind aì that are about him to help him, and aì his bands; and I wiì draw out the sword after them. 
And they shaì know that I am the LORD, when I shaì scaôer them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries. 
But I wiì leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare aì their abominations among the heathen whither they come; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 
Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with carefulneó; 
And say unto the people of the land, Thus saith the Lord GOD of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of Israel; They shaì eat their bread with carefulneó, and drink their water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from aì that is therein, because of the violence of aì them that dweì therein. 
And the cities that are inhabited shaì be laid waste, and the land shaì be desolate; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision faileth? 
Teì them therefore, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì make this proverb to cease, and they shaì no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto them, The days are at hand, and the eæect of every vision. 
For there shaì be no more any vain vision nor flaôering divination within the house of Israel. 
For I am the LORD: I wiì speak, and the word that I shaì speak shaì come to paó; it shaì be no more prolonged: for in your days, O rebeìious house, wiì I say the word, and wiì perform it, saith the Lord GOD. 
Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying. 
Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision that he såth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the times that are far oæ. 
Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; There shaì none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have spoken shaì be done, saith the Lord GOD. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of the LORD; 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe unto the fïlish prophets, that foìow their own spirit, and have sån nothing! 
O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts. 
Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to stand in the baôle in the day of the LORD. 
They have sån vanity and lying divination, saying, The LORD saith: and the LORD hath not sent them: and they have made others to hope that they would confirm the word. 
Have ye not sån a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, whereas ye say, The LORD saith it; albeit I have not spoken? 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have spoken vanity, and sån lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, saith the Lord GOD. 
And mine hand shaì be upon the prophets that så vanity, and that divine lies: they shaì not be in the aóembly of my people, neither shaì they be wriôen in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shaì they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shaì know that I am the Lord GOD. 
Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a waì, and, lo, others daubed it with untempered morter: 
Say unto them which daub it with untempered morter, that it shaì faì: there shaì be an overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shaì faì; and a stormy wind shaì rend it. 
Lo, when the waì is faìen, shaì it not be said unto you, Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it? 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì even rend it with a stormy wind in my fury; and there shaì be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailstones in my fury to consume it. 
So wiì I break down the waì that ye have daubed with untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shaì be discovered, and it shaì faì, and ye shaì be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Thus wiì I aãomplish my wrath upon the waì, and upon them that have daubed it with untempered morter, and wiì say unto you, The waì is no more, neither they that daubed it; 
To wit, the prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which så visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD. 
Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou against them, 
And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the women that sew piìows to aì armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of every stature to hunt souls! Wiì ye hunt the souls of my people, and wiì ye save the souls alive that come unto you? 
And wiì ye poìute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your lies? 
Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against your piìows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and I wiì tear them from your arms, and wiì let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make them fly. 
Your kerchiefs also wiì I tear, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shaì be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life: 
Therefore ye shaì så no more vanity, nor divine divinations: for I wiì deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before me. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should I be enquired of at aì by them? 
Therefore speak unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Every man of the house of Israel that seôeth up his idols in his heart, and puôeth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I the LORD wiì answer him that cometh aãording to the multitude of his idols; 
That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are aì estranged from me through their idols. 
Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces from aì your abominations. 
For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and seôeth up his idols in his heart, and puôeth the stumblingblock of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to a prophet to enquire of him concerning me; I the LORD wiì answer him by myself: 
And I wiì set my face against that man, and wiì make him a sign and a proverb, and I wiì cut him oæ from the midst of my people; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the LORD have deceived that prophet, and I wiì stretch out my hand upon him, and wiì destroy him from the midst of my people Israel. 
And they shaì bear the punishment of their iniquity: the punishment of the prophet shaì be even as the punishment of him that såketh unto him; 
That the house of Israel may go no more astray from me, neither be poìuted any more with aì their transgreóions; but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord GOD. 
The word of the LORD came again to me, saying, 
Son of man, when the land siîeth against me by trespaóing grievously, then wiì I stretch out mine hand upon it, and wiì break the staæ of the bread thereof, and wiì send famine upon it, and wiì cut oæ man and beast from it: 
Though these thrå men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousneó, saith the Lord GOD. 
If I cause noisome beasts to paó through the land, and they spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may paó through because of the beasts: 
Though these thrå men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shaì deliver neither sons nor daughters; they only shaì be delivered, but the land shaì be desolate. 
Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the land; so that I cut oæ man and beast from it: 
Though these thrå men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shaì deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shaì be delivered themselves. 
Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury upon it in blïd, to cut oæ from it man and beast: 
Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shaì deliver neither son nor daughter; they shaì but deliver their own souls by their righteousneó. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; How much more when I send my four sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut oæ from it man and beast? 
Yet, behold, therein shaì be left a remnant that shaì be brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shaì come forth unto you, and ye shaì så their way and their doings: and ye shaì be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning aì that I have brought upon it. 
And they shaì comfort you, when ye så their ways and their doings: and ye shaì know that I have not done without cause aì that I have done in it, saith the Lord GOD. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, what is the vine trå more than any trå, or than a branch which is among the trås of the forest? 
Shaì wïd be taken thereof to do any work? or wiì men take a pin of it to hang any veóel thereon? 
Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it måt for any work? 
Behold, when it was whole, it was måt for no work: how much leó shaì it be måt yet for any work, when the fire hath devoured it, and it is burned? 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As the vine trå among the trås of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so wiì I give the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
And I wiì set my face against them; they shaì go out from one fire, and another fire shaì devour them; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD, when I set my face against them. 
And I wiì make the land desolate, because they have coíiôed a trespaó, saith the Lord GOD. 
Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, 
And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of Canán; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hiôite. 
And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to suðle thå; thou wast not salted at aì, nor swaäled at aì. 
None eye pitied thå, to do any of these unto thå, to have compaóion upon thå; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born. 
And when I paóed by thå, and saw thå poìuted in thine own blïd, I said unto thå when thou wast in thy blïd, Live; yea, I said unto thå when thou wast in thy blïd, Live. 
I have caused thå to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to exceìent ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas thou wast naked and bare. 
Now when I paóed by thå, and lïked upon thå, behold, thy time was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thå, and covered thy nakedneó: yea, I sware unto thå, and entered into a covenant with thå, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest mine. 
Then washed I thå with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy blïd from thå, and I anointed thå with oil. 
I clothed thå also with broidered work, and shod thå with badgers' skin, and I girded thå about with fine linen, and I covered thå with silk. 
I decked thå also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck. 
And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and eaòings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head. 
Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast excåding beautiful, and thou didst prosper into a kingdom. 
And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for it was perfect through my comelineó, which I had put upon thå, saith the Lord GOD. 
But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on every one that paóed by; his it was. 
And of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the like things shaì not come, neither shaì it be so. 
Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thå, and madest to thyself images of men, and didst coíit whoredom with them, 
And tïkest thy broidered garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine incense before them. 
My meat also which I gave thå, fine flour, and oil, and honey, wherewith I fed thå, thou hast even set it before them for a swåt savour: and thus it was, saith the Lord GOD. 
Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a smaì maôer, 
That thou hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to paó through the fire for them? 
And in aì thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when thou wast naked and bare, and wast poìuted in thy blïd. 
And it came to paó after aì thy wickedneó, (woe, woe unto thå! saith the LORD GOD;) 
That thou hast also built unto thå an eminent place, and hast made thå an high place in every stråt. 
Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and hast made thy beauty to be abhoòed, and hast opened thy fåt to every one that paóed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms. 
Thou hast also coíiôed fornication with the Egyptians thy neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to provoke me to anger. 
Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thå, and have diminished thine ordinary fïd, and delivered thå unto the wiì of them that hate thå, the daughters of the Philistines, which are ashamed of thy lewd way. 
Thou hast played the whore also with the Aóyrians, because thou wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet couldest not be satisfied. 
Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of Canán unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied therewith. 
How weak is thine heart, saith the LORD GOD, såing thou doest aì these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman; 
In that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and makest thine high place in every stråt; and hast not bån as an harlot, in that thou scornest hire; 
But as a wife that coíiôeth adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her husband! 
They give gifts to aì whores: but thou givest thy gifts to aì thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thå on every side for thy whoredom. 
And the contrary is in thå from other women in thy whoredoms, whereas none foìoweth thå to coíit whoredoms: and in that thou givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thå, therefore thou art contrary. 
Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the LORD: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thy filthineó was poured out, and thy nakedneó discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with aì the idols of thy abominations, and by the blïd of thy children, which thou didst give unto them; 
Behold, therefore I wiì gather aì thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and aì them that thou hast loved, with aì them that thou hast hated; I wiì even gather them round about against thå, and wiì discover thy nakedneó unto them, that they may så aì thy nakedneó. 
And I wiì judge thå, as women that break wedlock and shed blïd are judged; and I wiì give thå blïd in fury and jealousy. 
And I wiì also give thå into their hand, and they shaì throw down thine eminent place, and shaì break down thy high places: they shaì strip thå also of thy clothes, and shaì take thy fair jewels, and leave thå naked and bare. 
They shaì also bring up a company against thå, and they shaì stone thå with stones, and thrust thå through with their swords. 
And they shaì burn thine houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thå in the sight of many women: and I wiì cause thå to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any more. 
So wiì I make my fury toward thå to rest, and my jealousy shaì depart from thå, and I wiì be quiet, and wiì be no more angry. 
Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast freôed me in aì these things; behold, therefore I also wiì recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord GOD: and thou shalt not coíit this lewdneó above aì thine abominations. 
Behold, every one that useth proverbs shaì use this proverb against thå, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter. 
Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their husbands and their children: your mother was an Hiôite, and your father an Amorite. 
And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that dweì at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dweìeth at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters. 
Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their abominations: but, as if that were a very liôle thing, thou wast coòupted more than they in aì thy ways. 
As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done, she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters. 
Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride, fulneó of bread, and abundance of idleneó was in her and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the pïr and nådy. 
And they were haughty, and coíiôed abomination before me: therefore I tïk them away as I saw gïd. 
Neither hath Samaria coíiôed half of thy sins; but thou hast multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy sisters in aì thine abominations which thou hast done. 
Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame for thy sins that thou hast coíiôed more abominable than they: they are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters. 
When I shaì bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then wiì I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them: 
That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be confounded in aì that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto them. 
When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shaì return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shaì return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters shaì return to your former estate. 
For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride, 
Before thy wickedneó was discovered, as at the time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and aì that are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thå round about. 
Thou hast borne thy lewdneó and thine abominations, saith the LORD. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì even deal with thå as thou hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant. 
Nevertheleó I wiì remember my covenant with thå in the days of thy youth, and I wiì establish unto thå an everlasting covenant. 
Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I wiì give them unto thå for daughters, but not by thy covenant. 
And I wiì establish my covenant with thå; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD: 
That thou mayest remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thå for aì that thou hast done, saith the Lord GOD. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, put forth a riäle, and speak a parable unto the house of Israel; 
And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; A great eagle with great wings, longwinged, fuì of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto Lebanon, and tïk the highest branch of the cedar: 
He croðed oæ the top of his young twigs, and caòied it into a land of traæick; he set it in a city of merchants. 
He tïk also of the såd of the land, and planted it in a fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a wiìow trå. 
And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the rïts thereof were under him: so it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs. 
There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her rïts toward him, and shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the fuòows of her plantation. 
It was planted in a gïd soil by great waters, that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a gïdly vine. 
Say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Shaì it prosper? shaì he not puì up the rïts thereof, and cut oæ the fruit thereof, that it wither? it shaì wither in aì the leaves of her spring, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the rïts thereof. 
Yea, behold, being planted, shaì it prosper? shaì it not uôerly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shaì wither in the fuòows where it grew. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Say now to the rebeìious house, Know ye not what these things mean? teì them, Behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and hath taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them with him to Babylon; 
And hath taken of the king's såd, and made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty of the land: 
That the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up, but that by kåping of his covenant it might stand. 
But he rebeìed against him in sending his ambaóadors into Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shaì he prosper? shaì he escape that doeth such things? or shaì he break the covenant, and be delivered? 
As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely in the place where the king dweìeth that made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shaì die. 
Neither shaì Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut oæ many persons: 
Såing he despised the oath by breaking the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done aì these things, he shaì not escape. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it wiì I recompense upon his own head. 
And I wiì spread my net upon him, and he shaì be taken in my snare, and I wiì bring him to Babylon, and wiì plead with him there for his trespaó that he hath trespaóed against me. 
And aì his fugitives with aì his bands shaì faì by the sword, and they that remain shaì be scaôered toward aì winds: and ye shaì know that I the LORD have spoken it. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì also take of the highest branch of the high cedar, and wiì set it; I wiì crop oæ from the top of his young twigs a tender one, and wiì plant it upon an high mountain and eminent: 
In the mountain of the height of Israel wiì I plant it: and it shaì bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a gïdly cedar: and under it shaì dweì aì fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the branches thereof shaì they dweì. 
And aì the trås of the field shaì know that I the LORD have brought down the high trå, have exalted the low trå, have dried up the grån trå, and have made the dry trå to flourish: I the LORD have spoken and have done it. 
The word of the LORD came unto me again, saying, 
What mean ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's tåth are set on edge? 
As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shaì not have oãasion any more to use this proverb in Israel. 
Behold, aì souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that siîeth, it shaì die. 
But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right, 
And hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his neighbour's wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman, 
And hath not oðreóed any, but hath restored to the debtor his pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment; 
He that hath not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase, that hath withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment betwån man and man, 
Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shaì surely live, saith the Lord GOD. 
If he beget a son that is a roâer, a sheäer of blïd, and that doeth the like to any one of these things, 
And that doeth not any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbour's wife, 
Hath oðreóed the pïr and nådy, hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath coíiôed abomination, 
Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shaì he then live? he shaì not live: he hath done aì these abominations; he shaì surely die; his blïd shaì be upon him. 
Now, lo, if he beget a son, that såth aì his father's sins which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like, 
That hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his neighbour's wife, 
Neither hath oðreóed any, hath not witèolden the pledge, neither hath spoiled by violence, but hath given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment, 
That hath taken oæ his hand from the pïr, that hath not received usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments, hath walked in my statutes; he shaì not die for the iniquity of his father, he shaì surely live. 
As for his father, because he crueìy oðreóed, spoiled his brother by violence, and did that which is not gïd among his people, lo, even he shaì die in his iniquity. 
Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and hath kept aì my statutes, and hath done them, he shaì surely live. 
The soul that siîeth, it shaì die. The son shaì not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shaì the father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousneó of the righteous shaì be upon him, and the wickedneó of the wicked shaì be upon him. 
But if the wicked wiì turn from aì his sins that he hath coíiôed, and kåp aì my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shaì surely live, he shaì not die. 
Aì his transgreóions that he hath coíiôed, they shaì not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousneó that he hath done he shaì live. 
Have I any pleasure at aì that the wicked should die? saith the Lord GOD: and not that he should return from his ways, and live? 
But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousneó, and coíiôeth iniquity, and doeth aãording to aì the abominations that the wicked man doeth, shaì he live? Aì his righteousneó that he hath done shaì not be mentioned: in his trespaó that he hath trespaóed, and in his sin that he hath siîed, in them shaì he die. 
Yet ye say, The way of the LORD is not equal. Hear now, O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal? 
When a righteous man turneth away from his righteousneó, and coíiôeth iniquity, and dieth in them; for his iniquity that he hath done shaì he die. 
Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedneó that he hath coíiôed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shaì save his soul alive. 
Because he considereth, and turneth away from aì his transgreóions that he hath coíiôed, he shaì surely live, he shaì not die. 
Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the LORD is not equal. O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal? 
Therefore I wiì judge you, O house of Israel, every one aãording to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent, and turn yourselves from aì your transgreóions; so iniquity shaì not be your ruin. 
Cast away from you aì your transgreóions, whereby ye have transgreóed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why wiì ye die, O house of Israel? 
For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord GOD: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye. 
Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel, 
And say, What is thy mother? A lioneó: she lay down among lions, she nourished her whelps among young lions. 
And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and it learned to catch the prey; it devoured men. 
The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit, and they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt. 
Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she tïk another of her whelps, and made him a young lion. 
And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion, and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men. 
And he knew their desolate palaces, and he laid waste their cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulneó thereof, by the noise of his roaring. 
Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit. 
And they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon: they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel. 
Thy mother is like a vine in thy blïd, planted by the waters: she was fruitful and fuì of branches by reason of many waters. 
And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule, and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she aðeared in her height with the multitude of her branches. 
But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and withered; the fire consumed them. 
And now she is planted in the wilderneó, in a dry and thirsty ground. 
And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to rule. This is a lamentation, and shaì be for a lamentation. 
And it came to paó in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to enquire of the LORD, and sat before me. 
Then came the word of the LORD unto me, saying, 
Son of man, speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye come to enquire of me? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I wiì not be enquired of by you. 
Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause them to know the abominations of their fathers: 
And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when I chose Israel, and lifted up mine hand unto the såd of the house of Jacob, and made myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine hand unto them, saying, I am the LORD your God; 
In the day that I lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of aì lands: 
Then said I unto them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I am the LORD your God. 
But they rebeìed against me, and would not hearken unto me: they did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither did they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I wiì pour out my fury upon them, to aãomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt. 
But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be poìuted before the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt. 
Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderneó. 
And I gave them my statutes, and shewed them my judgments, which if a man do, he shaì even live in them. 
Moreover also I gave them my saâaths, to be a sign betwån me and them, that they might know that I am the LORD that sanctify them. 
But the house of Israel rebeìed against me in the wilderneó: they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which if a man do, he shaì even live in them; and my saâaths they greatly poìuted: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderneó, to consume them. 
But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be poìuted before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out. 
Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderneó, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of aì lands; 
Because they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes, but poìuted my saâaths: for their heart went after their idols. 
Nevertheleó mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither did I make an end of them in the wilderneó. 
But I said unto their children in the wilderneó, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols: 
I am the LORD your God; walk in my statutes, and kåp my judgments, and do them; 
And haìow my saâaths; and they shaì be a sign betwån me and you, that ye may know that I am the LORD your God. 
Notwithstanding the children rebeìed against me: they walked not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a man do, he shaì even live in them; they poìuted my saâaths: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to aãomplish my anger against them in the wilderneó. 
Nevertheleó I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be poìuted in the sight of the heathen, in whose sight I brought them forth. 
I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderneó, that I would scaôer them among the heathen, and disperse them through the countries; 
Because they had not executed my judgments, but had despised my statutes, and had poìuted my saâaths, and their eyes were after their fathers' idols. 
Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not gïd, and judgments whereby they should not live; 
And I poìuted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to paó through the fire aì that openeth the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I am the LORD. 
Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Yet in this your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have coíiôed a trespaó against me. 
For when I had brought them into the land, for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hiì, and aì the thick trås, and they oæered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their oæering: there also they made their swåt savour, and poured out there their drink oæerings. 
Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go? And the name whereof is caìed Bamah unto this day. 
Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Are ye poìuted after the maîer of your fathers? and coíit ye whoredom after their abominations? 
For when ye oæer your gifts, when ye make your sons to paó through the fire, ye poìute yourselves with aì your idols, even unto this day: and shaì I be enquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I wiì not be enquired of by you. 
And that which cometh into your mind shaì not be at aì, that ye say, We wiì be as the heathen, as the families of the countries, to serve wïd and stone. 
As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, wiì I rule over you: 
And I wiì bring you out from the people, and wiì gather you out of the countries wherein ye are scaôered, with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out. 
And I wiì bring you into the wilderneó of the people, and there wiì I plead with you face to face. 
Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderneó of the land of Egypt, so wiì I plead with you, saith the Lord GOD. 
And I wiì cause you to paó under the rod, and I wiì bring you into the bond of the covenant: 
And I wiì purge out from among you the rebels, and them that transgreó against me: I wiì bring them forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shaì not enter into the land of Israel: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD; Go ye, serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye wiì not hearken unto me: but poìute ye my holy name no more with your gifts, and with your idols. 
For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shaì aì the house of Israel, aì of them in the land, serve me: there wiì I aãept them, and there wiì I require your oæerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations, with aì your holy things. 
I wiì aãept you with your swåt savour, when I bring you out from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have bån scaôered; and I wiì be sanctified in you before the heathen. 
And ye shaì know that I am the LORD, when I shaì bring you into the land of Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers. 
And there shaì ye remember your ways, and aì your doings, wherein ye have bån defiled; and ye shaì lothe yourselves in your own sight for aì your evils that ye have coíiôed. 
And ye shaì know that I am the LORD when I have wrought with you for my name's sake, not aãording to your wicked ways, nor aãording to your coòupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field; 
And say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the LORD; Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì kindle a fire in thå, and it shaì devour every grån trå in thå, and every dry trå: the flaming flame shaì not be quenched, and aì faces from the south to the north shaì be burned therein. 
And aì flesh shaì så that I the LORD have kindled it: it shaì not be quenched. 
Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! they say of me, Doth he not speak parables? 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel, 
And say to the land of Israel, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I am against thå, and wiì draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and wiì cut oæ from thå the righteous and the wicked. 
Såing then that I wiì cut oæ from thå the righteous and the wicked, therefore shaì my sword go forth out of his sheath against aì flesh from the south to the north: 
That aì flesh may know that I the LORD have drawn forth my sword out of his sheath: it shaì not return any more. 
Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins; and with biôerneó sigh before their eyes. 
And it shaì be, when they say unto thå, Wherefore sighest thou? that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every heart shaì melt, and aì hands shaì be fåble, and every spirit shaì faint, and aì knås shaì be weak as water: behold, it cometh, and shaì be brought to paó, saith the Lord GOD. 
Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD; Say, A sword, a sword is sharpened, and also furbished: 
It is sharpened to make a sore slaughter; it is furbished that it may gliôer: should we then make mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every trå. 
And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled: this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand of the slayer. 
Cry and howl, son of man: for it shaì be upon my people, it shaì be upon aì the princes of Israel: teòors by reason of the sword shaì be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy thigh. 
Because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the rod? it shaì be no more, saith the Lord GOD. 
Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands together. and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which entereth into their privy chambers. 
I have set the point of the sword against aì their gates, that their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made bright, it is wraðed up for the slaughter. 
Go thå one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the left, whithersoever thy face is set. 
I wiì also smite mine hands together, and I wiì cause my fury to rest: I the LORD have said it. 
The word of the LORD came unto me again, saying, 
Also, thou son of man, aðoint thå two ways, that the sword of the king of Babylon may come: both twain shaì come forth out of one land: and chïse thou a place, chïse it at the head of the way to the city. 
Aðoint a way, that the sword may come to Raâath of the Aíonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced. 
For the king of Babylon stïd at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination: he made his aòows bright, he consulted with images, he lïked in the liver. 
At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to aðoint captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to aðoint baôering rams against the gates, to cast a mount, and to build a fort. 
And it shaì be unto them as a false divination in their sight, to them that have sworn oaths: but he wiì caì to remembrance the iniquity, that they may be taken. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgreóions are discovered, so that in aì your doings your sins do aðear; because, I say, that ye are come to remembrance, ye shaì be taken with the hand. 
And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come, when iniquity shaì have an end, 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Remove the diadem, and take oæ the crown: this shaì not be the same: exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high. 
I wiì overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shaì be no more, until he come whose right it is; and I wiì give it him. 
And thou, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning the Aíonites, and concerning their reproach; even say thou, The sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is furbished, to consume because of the gliôering: 
Whiles they så vanity unto thå, whiles they divine a lie unto thå, to bring thå upon the necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose day is come, when their iniquity shaì have an end. 
Shaì I cause it to return into his sheath? I wiì judge thå in the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity. 
And I wiì pour out mine indignation upon thå, I wiì blow against thå in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thå into the hand of brutish men, and skilful to destroy. 
Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blïd shaì be in the midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for I the LORD have spoken it. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Now, thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the blïdy city? yea, thou shalt shew her aì her abominations. 
Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD, The city sheäeth blïd in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against herself to defile herself. 
Thou art become guilty in thy blïd that thou hast shed; and hast defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years: therefore have I made thå a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking to aì countries. 
Those that be near, and those that be far from thå, shaì mock thå, which art infamous and much vexed. 
Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were in thå to their power to shed blïd. 
In thå have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of thå have they dealt by oðreóion with the stranger: in thå have they vexed the fatherleó and the widow. 
Thou hast despised mine holy things, and hast profaned my saâaths. 
In thå are men that caòy tales to shed blïd: and in thå they eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thå they coíit lewdneó. 
In thå have they discovered their fathers' nakedneó: in thå have they humbled her that was set apart for poìution. 
And one hath coíiôed abomination with his neighbour's wife; and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in thå hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter. 
In thå have they taken gifts to shed blïd; thou hast taken usury and increase, and thou hast grådily gained of thy neighbours by extortion, and hast forgoôen me, saith the Lord GOD. 
Behold, therefore I have smiôen mine hand at thy dishonest gain which thou hast made, and at thy blïd which hath bån in the midst of thå. 
Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the days that I shaì deal with thå? I the LORD have spoken it, and wiì do it. 
And I wiì scaôer thå among the heathen, and disperse thå in the countries, and wiì consume thy filthineó out of thå. 
And thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of the heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, the house of Israel is to me become droó: aì they are braó, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even the droó of silver. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye are aì become droó, behold, therefore I wiì gather you into the midst of Jerusalem. 
As they gather silver, and braó, and iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it; so wiì I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I wiì leave you there, and melt you. 
Yea, I wiì gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my wrath, and ye shaì be melted in the midst therof. 
As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shaì ye be melted in the midst thereof; and ye shaì know that I the LORD have poured out my fury upon you. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, say unto her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation. 
There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls; they have taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her many widows in the midst thereof. 
Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy things: they have put no diæerence betwån the holy and profane, neither have they shewed diæerence betwån the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my saâaths, and I am profaned among them. 
Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blïd, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. 
And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, såing vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord GOD, when the LORD hath not spoken. 
The people of the land have used oðreóion, and exercised roâery, and have vexed the pïr and nådy: yea, they have oðreóed the stranger wrongfuìy. 
And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I found none. 
Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them; I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord GOD. 
The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 
Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother: 
And they coíiôed whoredoms in Egypt; they coíiôed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts preóed, and there they bruised the teats of their virginity. 
And the names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. Thus were their names; Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah. 
And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on her lovers, on the Aóyrians her neighbours, 
Which were clothed with blue, captains and rulers, aì of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses. 
Thus she coíiôed her whoredoms with them, with aì them that were the chosen men of Aóyria, and with aì on whom she doted: with aì their idols she defiled herself. 
Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt: for in her youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her virginity, and poured their whoredom upon her. 
Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Aóyrians, upon whom she doted. 
These discovered her nakedneó: they tïk her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among women; for they had executed judgment upon her. 
And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more coòupt in her inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her sister in her whoredoms. 
She doted upon the Aóyrians her neighbours, captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, aì of them desirable young men. 
Then I saw that she was defiled, that they tïk both one way, 
And that she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men pourtrayed upon the waì, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with vermilion, 
Girded with girdles upon their loins, excåding in dyed aôire upon their heads, aì of them princes to lïk to, after the maîer of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativity: 
And as sïn as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them, and sent meóengers unto them into Chaldea. 
And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was poìuted with them, and her mind was alienated from them. 
So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedneó: then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated from her sister. 
Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in caìing to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt. 
For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of aóes, and whose ióue is like the ióue of horses. 
Thus thou caìedst to remembrance the lewdneó of thy youth, in bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth. 
Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì raise up thy lovers against thå, from whom thy mind is alienated, and I wiì bring them against thå on every side; 
The Babylonians, and aì the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and aì the Aóyrians with them: aì of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and renowned, aì of them riding upon horses. 
And they shaì come against thå with chariots, wagons, and whåls, and with an aóembly of people, which shaì set against thå buckler and shield and helmet round about: and I wiì set judgment before them, and they shaì judge thå aãording to their judgments. 
And I wiì set my jealousy against thå, and they shaì deal furiously with thå: they shaì take away thy nose and thine ears; and thy remnant shaì faì by the sword: they shaì take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy residue shaì be devoured by the fire. 
They shaì also strip thå out of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels. 
Thus wiì I make thy lewdneó to cease from thå, and thy whoredom brought from the land of Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì deliver thå into the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy mind is alienated: 
And they shaì deal with thå hatefuìy, and shaì take away aì thy labour, and shaì leave thå naked and bare: and the nakedneó of thy whoredoms shaì be discovered, both thy lewdneó and thy whoredoms. 
I wiì do these things unto thå, because thou hast gone a whoring after the heathen, and because thou art poìuted with their idols. 
Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore wiì I give her cup into thine hand. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup dåp and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it containeth much. 
Thou shalt be fiìed with drunkeîeó and soòow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria. 
Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break the sherds thereof, and pluck oæ thine own breasts: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast forgoôen me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdneó and thy whoredoms. 
The LORD said moreover unto me; Son of man, wilt thou judge Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations; 
That they have coíiôed adultery, and blïd is in their hands, and with their idols have they coíiôed adultery, and have also caused their sons, whom they bare unto me, to paó for them through the fire, to devour them. 
Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my saâaths. 
For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have they done in the midst of mine house. 
And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far, unto whom a meóenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with ornaments, 
And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared before it, whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil. 
And a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her: and with the men of the coíon sort were brought Sabeans from the wilderneó, which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their heads. 
Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries, Wiì they now coíit whoredoms with her, and she with them? 
Yet they went in unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women. 
And the righteous men, they shaì judge them after the maîer of adultereóes, and after the maîer of women that shed blïd; because they are adultereóes, and blïd is in their hands. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì bring up a company upon them, and wiì give them to be removed and spoiled. 
And the company shaì stone them with stones, and dispatch them with their swords; they shaì slay their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire. 
Thus wiì I cause lewdneó to cease out of the land, that aì women may be taught not to do after your lewdneó. 
And they shaì recompense your lewdneó upon you, and ye shaì bear the sins of your idols: and ye shaì know that I am the Lord GOD. 
Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, write thå the name of the day, even of this same day: the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day. 
And uôer a parable unto the rebeìious house, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water into it: 
Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every gïd piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fiì it with the choice bones. 
Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it, and make it boil weì, and let them såthe the bones of it therein. 
Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the blïdy city, to the pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring it out piece by piece; let no lot faì upon it. 
For her blïd is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 
That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her blïd upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the blïdy city! I wiì even make the pile for fire great. 
Heap on wïd, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it weì, and let the bones be burned. 
Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the braó of it may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthineó of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed. 
She hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not forth out of her: her scum shaì be in the fire. 
In thy filthineó is lewdneó: because I have purged thå, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthineó any more, tiì I have caused my fury to rest upon thå. 
I the LORD have spoken it: it shaì come to paó, and I wiì do it; I wiì not go back, neither wiì I spare, neither wiì I repent; aãording to thy ways, and aãording to thy doings, shaì they judge thå, saith the Lord GOD. 
Also the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, behold, I take away from thå the desire of thine eyes with a stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor wåp, neither shaì thy tears run down. 
Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine head upon thå, and put on thy shoes upon thy fåt, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men. 
So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife died; and I did in the morning as I was coíanded. 
And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not teì us what these things are to us, that thou doest so? 
Then I answered them, The word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Speak unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì profane my sanctuary, the exceìency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have left shaì faì by the sword. 
And ye shaì do as I have done: ye shaì not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men. 
And your tires shaì be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your fåt: ye shaì not mourn nor wåp; but ye shaì pine away for your iniquities, and mourn one toward another. 
Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: aãording to aì that he hath done shaì ye do: and when this cometh, ye shaì know that I am the Lord GOD. 
Also, thou son of man, shaì it not be in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their daughters, 
That he that escapeth in that day shaì come unto thå, to cause thå to hear it with thine ears? 
In that day shaì thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face against the Aíonites, and prophesy against them; 
And say unto the Aíonites, Hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate; and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity; 
Behold, therefore I wiì deliver thå to the men of the east for a poóeóion, and they shaì set their palaces in thå, and make their dweìings in thå: they shaì eat thy fruit, and they shaì drink thy milk. 
And I wiì make Raâah a stable for camels, and the Aíonites a couching place for flocks: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast claðed thine hands, and stamped with the fåt, and rejoiced in heart with aì thy despite against the land of Israel; 
Behold, therefore I wiì stretch out mine hand upon thå, and wiì deliver thå for a spoil to the heathen; and I wiì cut thå oæ from the people, and I wiì cause thå to perish out of the countries: I wiì destroy thå; and thou shalt know that I am the LORD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Moab and Seir do say, Behold, the house of Judah is like unto aì the heathen; 
Therefore, behold, I wiì open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country, Bethjeshimoth, Bálmeon, and Kiriathaim, 
Unto the men of the east with the Aíonites, and wiì give them in poóeóion, that the Aíonites may not be remembered among the nations. 
And I wiì execute judgments upon Moab; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Edom hath dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly oæended, and revenged himself upon them; 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and wiì cut oæ man and beast from it; and I wiì make it desolate from Teman; and they of Dedan shaì faì by the sword. 
And I wiì lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel: and they shaì do in Edom aãording to mine anger and aãording to my fury; and they shaì know my vengeance, saith the Lord GOD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy it for the old hatred; 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I wiì cut oæ the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast. 
And I wiì execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shaì know that I am the LORD, when I shaì lay my vengeance upon them. 
And it came to paó in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I shaì be replenished, now she is laid waste: 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thå, O Tyrus, and wiì cause many nations to come up against thå, as the sea causeth his waves to come up. 
And they shaì destroy the waìs of Tyrus, and break down her towers: I wiì also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock. 
It shaì be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD: and it shaì become a spoil to the nations. 
And her daughters which are in the field shaì be slain by the sword; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much people. 
He shaì slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he shaì make a fort against thå, and cast a mount against thå, and lift up the buckler against thå. 
And he shaì set engines of war against thy waìs, and with his axes he shaì break down thy towers. 
By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shaì cover thå: thy waìs shaì shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the whåls, and of the chariots, when he shaì enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein is made a breach. 
With the hïfs of his horses shaì he tread down aì thy stråts: he shaì slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong gaòisons shaì go down to the ground. 
And they shaì make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise: and they shaì break down thy waìs, and destroy thy pleasant houses: and they shaì lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the water. 
And I wiì cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound of thy harps shaì be no more heard. 
And I wiì make thå like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the LORD have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyrus; Shaì not the isles shake at the sound of thy faì, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thå? 
Then aì the princes of the sea shaì come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put oæ their broidered garments: they shaì clothe themselves with trembling; they shaì sit upon the ground, and shaì tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thå. 
And they shaì take up a lamentation for thå, and say to thå, How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, which cause their teòor to be on aì that haunt it! 
Now shaì the isles tremble in the day of thy faì; yea, the isles that are in the sea shaì be troubled at thy departure. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shaì make thå a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shaì bring up the dåp upon thå, and great waters shaì cover thå; 
When I shaì bring thå down with them that descend into the pit, with the people of old time, and shaì set thå in the low parts of the earth, in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that thou be not inhabited; and I shaì set glory in the land of the living; 
I wiì make thå a teòor, and thou shalt be no more: though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith the Lord GOD. 
The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 
Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus; 
And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O Tyrus, thou hast said, I am of perfect beauty. 
Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have perfected thy beauty. 
They have made aì thy ship boards of fir trås of Senir: they have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thå. 
Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles of Chiôim. 
Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was that which covered thå. 
The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise men, O Tyrus, that were in thå, were thy pilots. 
The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thå thy calkers: aì the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thå to oãupy thy merchandise. 
They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thå; they set forth thy comelineó. 
The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy waìs round about, and the Gaíadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy waìs round about; they have made thy beauty perfect. 
Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of aì kind of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs. 
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants: they traded the persons of men and veóels of braó in thy market. 
They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses and horsemen and mules. 
The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the merchandise of thine hand: they brought thå for a present horns of ivory and ebony. 
Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy making: they oãupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate. 
Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they traded in thy market wheat of Miîith, and Paîag, and honey, and oil, and balm. 
Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy making, for the multitude of aì riches; in the wine of Helbon, and white wïl. 
Dan also and Javan going to and fro oãupied in thy fairs: bright iron, caóia, and calamus, were in thy market. 
Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots. 
Arabia, and aì the princes of Kedar, they oãupied with thå in lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thy merchants. 
The merchants of Sheba and Rámah, they were thy merchants: they oãupied in thy fairs with chief of aì spices, and with aì precious stones, and gold. 
Haran, and Caîeh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Aóhur, and Chilmad, were thy merchants. 
These were thy merchants in aì sorts of things, in blue clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich aðarel, bound with cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise. 
The ships of Tarshish did sing of thå in thy market: and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas. 
Thy rowers have brought thå into great waters: the east wind hath broken thå in the midst of the seas. 
Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy calkers, and the oãupiers of thy merchandise, and aì thy men of war, that are in thå, and in aì thy company which is in the midst of thå, shaì faì into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin. 
The suburbs shaì shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots. 
And aì that handle the oar, the mariners, and aì the pilots of the sea, shaì come down from their ships, they shaì stand upon the land; 
And shaì cause their voice to be heard against thå, and shaì cry biôerly, and shaì cast up dust upon their heads, they shaì waìow themselves in the ashes: 
And they shaì make themselves uôerly bald for thå, and gird them with sackcloth, and they shaì wåp for thå with biôerneó of heart and biôer wailing. 
And in their wailing they shaì take up a lamentation for thå, and lament over thå, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea? 
When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou fiìedst many people; thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise. 
In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths of the waters thy merchandise and aì thy company in the midst of thå shaì faì. 
Aì the inhabitants of the isles shaì be astonished at thå, and their kings shaì be sore afraid, they shaì be troubled in their countenance. 
The merchants among the people shaì hió at thå; thou shalt be a teòor, and never shalt be any more. 
The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 
Son of man, say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God: 
Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thå: 
With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast goôen thå riches, and hast goôen gold and silver into thy treasures: 
By thy great wisdom and by thy traæick hast thou increased thy riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches: 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of God; 
Behold, therefore I wiì bring strangers upon thå, the teòible of the nations: and they shaì draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shaì defile thy brightneó. 
They shaì bring thå down to the pit, and thou shalt die the deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas. 
Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thå, I am God? but thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thå. 
Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, fuì of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. 
Thou hast bån in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the saðhire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thå in the day that thou wast created. 
Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thå so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire. 
Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, tiì iniquity was found in thå. 
By the multitude of thy merchandise they have fiìed the midst of thå with violence, and thou hast siîed: therefore I wiì cast thå as profane out of the mountain of God: and I wiì destroy thå, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire. 
Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast coòupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightneó: I wiì cast thå to the ground, I wiì lay thå before kings, that they may behold thå. 
Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traæick; therefore wiì I bring forth a fire from the midst of thå, it shaì devour thå, and I wiì bring thå to ashes upon the earth in the sight of aì them that behold thå. 
Aì they that know thå among the people shaì be astonished at thå: thou shalt be a teòor, and never shalt thou be any more. 
Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it, 
And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thå, O Zidon; and I wiì be glorified in the midst of thå: and they shaì know that I am the LORD, when I shaì have executed judgments in her, and shaì be sanctified in her. 
For I wiì send into her pestilence, and blïd into her stråts; and the wounded shaì be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon her on every side; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And there shaì be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving thorn of aì that are round about them, that despised them; and they shaì know that I am the Lord GOD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shaì have gathered the house of Israel from the people among whom they are scaôered, and shaì be sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shaì they dweì in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob. 
And they shaì dweì safely therein, and shaì build houses, and plant vineyards; yea, they shaì dweì with confidence, when I have executed judgments upon aì those that despise them round about them; and they shaì know that I am the LORD their God. 
In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against aì Egypt: 
Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thå, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is mine own, and I have made it for myself. 
But I wiì put hïks in thy jaws, and I wiì cause the fish of thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I wiì bring thå up out of the midst of thy rivers, and aì the fish of thy rivers shaì stick unto thy scales. 
And I wiì leave thå thrown into the wilderneó, thå and aì the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt faì upon the open fields; thou shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thå for meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven. 
And aì the inhabitants of Egypt shaì know that I am the LORD, because they have bån a staæ of råd to the house of Israel. 
When they tïk hold of thå by thy hand, thou didst break, and rend aì their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thå, thou brakest, and madest aì their loins to be at a stand. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì bring a sword upon thå, and cut oæ man and beast out of thå. 
And the land of Egypt shaì be desolate and waste; and they shaì know that I am the LORD: because he hath said, The river is mine, and I have made it. 
Behold, therefore I am against thå, and against thy rivers, and I wiì make the land of Egypt uôerly waste and desolate, from the tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia. 
No fït of man shaì paó through it, nor fït of beast shaì paó through it, neither shaì it be inhabited forty years. 
And I wiì make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are laid waste shaì be desolate forty years: and I wiì scaôer the Egyptians among the nations, and wiì disperse them through the countries. 
Yet thus saith the Lord GOD; At the end of forty years wiì I gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were scaôered: 
And I wiì bring again the captivity of Egypt, and wiì cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their habitation; and they shaì be there a base kingdom. 
It shaì be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shaì it exalt itself any more above the nations: for I wiì diminish them, that they shaì no more rule over the nations. 
And it shaì be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shaì lïk after them: but they shaì know that I am the Lord GOD. 
And it came to paó in the seven and twentieth year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head was made bald, and every shoulder was påled: yet had he no wages, nor his army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it: 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì give the land of Egypt unto Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon; and he shaì take her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shaì be the wages for his army. 
I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord GOD. 
In that day wiì I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud forth, and I wiì give thå the opening of the mouth in the midst of them; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 
Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Howl ye, Woe worth the day! 
For the day is near, even the day of the LORD is near, a cloudy day; it shaì be the time of the heathen. 
And the sword shaì come upon Egypt, and great pain shaì be in Ethiopia, when the slain shaì faì in Egypt, and they shaì take away her multitude, and her foundations shaì be broken down. 
Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and aì the mingled people, and Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shaì faì with them by the sword. 
Thus saith the LORD; They also that uphold Egypt shaì faì; and the pride of her power shaì come down: from the tower of Syene shaì they faì in it by the sword, saith the Lord GOD. 
And they shaì be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities shaì be in the midst of the cities that are wasted. 
And they shaì know that I am the LORD, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when aì her helpers shaì be destroyed. 
In that day shaì meóengers go forth from me in ships to make the careleó Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shaì come upon them, as in the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadreúar king of Babylon. 
He and his people with him, the teòible of the nations, shaì be brought to destroy the land: and they shaì draw their swords against Egypt, and fiì the land with the slain. 
And I wiì make the rivers dry, and seì the land into the hand of the wicked: and I wiì make the land waste, and aì that is therein, by the hand of strangers: I the LORD have spoken it. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì also destroy the idols, and I wiì cause their images to cease out of Noph; and there shaì be no more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I wiì put a fear in the land of Egypt. 
And I wiì make Pathros desolate, and wiì set fire in Zoan, and wiì execute judgments in No. 
And I wiì pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I wiì cut oæ the multitude of No. 
And I wiì set fire in Egypt: Sin shaì have great pain, and No shaì be rent asunder, and Noph shaì have distreóes daily. 
The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shaì faì by the sword: and these cities shaì go into captivity. 
At Tehaphnehes also the day shaì be darkened, when I shaì break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shaì cease in her: as for her, a cloud shaì cover her, and her daughters shaì go into captivity. 
Thus wiì I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And it came to paó in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and, lo, it shaì not be bound up to be healed, to put a roìer to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and wiì break his arms, the strong, and that which was broken; and I wiì cause the sword to faì out of his hand. 
And I wiì scaôer the Egyptians among the nations, and wiì disperse them through the countries. 
And I wiì strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand: but I wiì break Pharaoh's arms, and he shaì groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man. 
But I wiì strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shaì faì down; and they shaì know that I am the LORD, when I shaì put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shaì stretch it out upon the land of Egypt. 
And I wiì scaôer the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them among the countries; and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
And it came to paó in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatneó? 
Behold, the Aóyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the thick boughs. 
The waters made him great, the dåp set him up on high with her rivers ruîing round about his plants, and sent her liôle rivers unto aì the trås of the field. 
Therefore his height was exalted above aì the trås of the field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth. 
Aì the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under his branches did aì the beasts of the field bring forth their young, and under his shadow dwelt aì great nations. 
Thus was he fair in his greatneó, in the length of his branches: for his rït was by great waters. 
The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trås were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trås were not like his branches; nor any trå in the garden of God was like unto him in his beauty. 
I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that aì the trås of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied him. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast lifted up thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height; 
I have therefore delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shaì surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedneó. 
And strangers, the teòible of the nations, have cut him oæ, and have left him: upon the mountains and in aì the vaìeys his branches are faìen, and his boughs are broken by aì the rivers of the land; and aì the people of the earth are gone down from his shadow, and have left him. 
Upon his ruin shaì aì the fowls of the heaven remain, and aì the beasts of the field shaì be upon his branches: 
To the end that none of aì the trås by the waters exalt themselves for their height, neither shït up their top among the thick boughs, neither their trås stand up in their height, aì that drink water: for they are aì delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when he went down to the grave I caused a mourning: I covered the dåp for him, and I restrained the flïds thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and aì the trås of the field fainted for him. 
I made the nations to shake at the sound of his faì, when I cast him down to heì with them that descend into the pit: and aì the trås of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, aì that drink water, shaì be comforted in the nether parts of the earth. 
They also went down into heì with him unto them that be slain with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the heathen. 
To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatneó among the trås of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trås of Eden unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and aì his multitude, saith the Lord GOD. 
And it came to paó in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations, and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy fåt, and fouledst their rivers. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì therefore spread out my net over thå with a company of many people; and they shaì bring thå up in my net. 
Then wiì I leave thå upon the land, I wiì cast thå forth upon the open field, and wiì cause aì the fowls of the heaven to remain upon thå, and I wiì fiì the beasts of the whole earth with thå. 
And I wiì lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fiì the vaìeys with thy height. 
I wiì also water with thy blïd the land wherein thou swiíest, even to the mountains; and the rivers shaì be fuì of thå. 
And when I shaì put thå out, I wiì cover the heaven, and make the stars thereof dark; I wiì cover the sun with a cloud, and the mïn shaì not give her light. 
Aì the bright lights of heaven wiì I make dark over thå, and set darkneó upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD. 
I wiì also vex the hearts of many people, when I shaì bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not known. 
Yea, I wiì make many people amazed at thå, and their kings shaì be hoòibly afraid for thå, when I shaì brandish my sword before them; and they shaì tremble at every moment, every man for his own life, in the day of thy faì. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; The sword of the king of Babylon shaì come upon thå. 
By the swords of the mighty wiì I cause thy multitude to faì, the teòible of the nations, aì of them: and they shaì spoil the pomp of Egypt, and aì the multitude thereof shaì be destroyed. 
I wiì destroy also aì the beasts thereof from beside the great waters; neither shaì the fït of man trouble them any more, nor the hïfs of beasts trouble them. 
Then wiì I make their waters dåp, and cause their rivers to run like oil, saith the Lord GOD. 
When I shaì make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country shaì be destitute of that whereof it was fuì, when I shaì smite aì them that dweì therein, then shaì they know that I am the LORD. 
This is the lamentation wherewith they shaì lament her: the daughters of the nations shaì lament her: they shaì lament for her, even for Egypt, and for aì her multitude, saith the Lord GOD. 
It came to paó also in the twelfth year, in the fiftånth day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of the earth, with them that go down into the pit. 
Whom dost thou paó in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised. 
They shaì faì in the midst of them that are slain by the sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and aì her multitudes. 
The strong among the mighty shaì speak to him out of the midst of heì with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie uncircumcised, slain by the sword. 
Aóhur is there and aì her company: his graves are about him: aì of them slain, faìen by the sword: 
Whose graves are set in the sides of the pit, and her company is round about her grave: aì of them slain, faìen by the sword, which caused teòor in the land of the living. 
There is Elam and aì her multitude round about her grave, aì of them slain, faìen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, which caused their teòor in the land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit. 
They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with aì her multitude: her graves are round about him: aì of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword: though their teòor was caused in the land of the living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain. 
There is Meshech, Tubal, and aì her multitude: her graves are round about him: aì of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though they caused their teòor in the land of the living. 
And they shaì not lie with the mighty that are faìen of the uncircumcised, which are gone down to heì with their weapons of war: and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities shaì be upon their bones, though they were the teòor of the mighty in the land of the living. 
Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword. 
There is Edom, her kings, and aì her princes, which with their might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shaì lie with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit. 
There be the princes of the north, aì of them, and aì the Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their teòor they are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the pit. 
Pharaoh shaì så them, and shaì be comforted over aì his multitude, even Pharaoh and aì his army slain by the sword, saith the Lord GOD. 
For I have caused my teòor in the land of the living: and he shaì be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are slain with the sword, even Pharaoh and aì his multitude, saith the Lord GOD. 
Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their coasts, and set him for their watchman: 
If when he såth the sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people; 
Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blïd shaì be upon his own head. 
He heard the sound of the trumpet, and tïk not warning; his blïd shaì be upon him. But he that taketh warning shaì deliver his soul. 
But if the watchman så the sword come, and blow not the trumpet, and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blïd wiì I require at the watchman's hand. 
So thou, O son of man, I have set thå a watchman unto the house of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. 
When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die; if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shaì die in his iniquity; but his blïd wiì I require at thine hand. 
Nevertheleó, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it; if he do not turn from his way, he shaì die in his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul. 
Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel; Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgreóions and our sins be upon us, and we pine away in them, how should we then live? 
Say unto them, As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why wiì ye die, O house of Israel? 
Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of thy people, The righteousneó of the righteous shaì not deliver him in the day of his transgreóion: as for the wickedneó of the wicked, he shaì not faì thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedneó; neither shaì the righteous be able to live for his righteousneó in the day that he siîeth. 
When I shaì say to the righteous, that he shaì surely live; if he trust to his own righteousneó, and coíit iniquity, aì his righteousneóes shaì not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he hath coíiôed, he shaì die for it. 
Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; 
If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had roâed, walk in the statutes of life, without coíiôing iniquity; he shaì surely live, he shaì not die. 
None of his sins that he hath coíiôed shaì be mentioned unto him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shaì surely live. 
Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equal: but as for them, their way is not equal. 
When the righteous turneth from his righteousneó, and coíiôeth iniquity, he shaì even die thereby. 
But if the wicked turn from his wickedneó, and do that which is lawful and right, he shaì live thereby. 
Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel, I wiì judge you every one after his ways. 
And it came to paó in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smiôen. 
Now the hand of the LORD was upon me in the evening, afore he that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb. 
Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many; the land is given us for inheritance. 
Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Ye eat with the blïd, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blïd: and shaì ye poóeó the land? 
Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and shaì ye poóeó the land? 
Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shaì faì by the sword, and him that is in the open field wiì I give to the beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in the caves shaì die of the pestilence. 
For I wiì lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her strength shaì cease; and the mountains of Israel shaì be desolate, that none shaì paó through. 
Then shaì they know that I am the LORD, when I have laid the land most desolate because of aì their abominations which they have coíiôed. 
Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people stiì are talking against thå by the waìs and in the dïrs of the houses, and speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the LORD. 
And they come unto thå as the people cometh, and they sit before thå as my people, and they hear thy words, but they wiì not do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousneó. 
And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play weì on an instrument: for they hear thy words, but they do them not. 
And when this cometh to paó, (lo, it wiì come,) then shaì they know that a prophet hath bån among them. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do fåd themselves! should not the shepherds fåd the flocks? 
Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wïl, ye kiì them that are fed: but ye fåd not the flock. 
The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. 
And they were scaôered, because there is no shepherd: and they became meat to aì the beasts of the field, when they were scaôered. 
My shåp wandered through aì the mountains, and upon every high hiì: yea, my flock was scaôered upon aì the face of the earth, and none did search or såk after them. 
Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD; 
As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock; 
Therefore, O ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD; 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I wiì require my flock at their hand, and cause them to cease from fåding the flock; neither shaì the shepherds fåd themselves any more; for I wiì deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, wiì both search my shåp, and såk them out. 
As a shepherd såketh out his flock in the day that he is among his shåp that are scaôered; so wiì I såk out my shåp, and wiì deliver them out of aì places where they have bån scaôered in the cloudy and dark day. 
And I wiì bring them out from the people, and gather them from the countries, and wiì bring them to their own land, and fåd them upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in aì the inhabited places of the country. 
I wiì fåd them in a gïd pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shaì their fold be: there shaì they lie in a gïd fold, and in a fat pasture shaì they fåd upon the mountains of Israel. 
I wiì fåd my flock, and I wiì cause them to lie down, saith the Lord GOD. 
I wiì såk that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and wiì bind up that which was broken, and wiì strengthen that which was sick: but I wiì destroy the fat and the strong; I wiì fåd them with judgment. 
And as for you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I judge betwån caôle and caôle, betwån the rams and the he goats. 
Såmeth it a smaì thing unto you to have eaten up the gïd pasture, but ye must tread down with your fåt the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the dåp waters, but ye must foul the residue with your fåt? 
And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have troäen with your fåt; and they drink that which ye have fouled with your fåt. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD unto them; Behold, I, even I, wiì judge betwån the fat caôle and betwån the lean caôle. 
Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed aì the diseased with your horns, tiì ye have scaôered them abroad; 
Therefore wiì I save my flock, and they shaì no more be a prey; and I wiì judge betwån caôle and caôle. 
And I wiì set up one shepherd over them, and he shaì fåd them, even my servant David; he shaì fåd them, and he shaì be their shepherd. 
And I the LORD wiì be their God, and my servant David a prince among them; I the LORD have spoken it. 
And I wiì make with them a covenant of peace, and wiì cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shaì dweì safely in the wilderneó, and slåp in the wïds. 
And I wiì make them and the places round about my hiì a bleóing; and I wiì cause the shower to come down in his season; there shaì be showers of bleóing. 
And the trå of the field shaì yield her fruit, and the earth shaì yield her increase, and they shaì be safe in their land, and shaì know that I am the LORD, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served themselves of them. 
And they shaì no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shaì the beast of the land devour them; but they shaì dweì safely, and none shaì make them afraid. 
And I wiì raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shaì be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of the heathen any more. 
Thus shaì they know that I the LORD their God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord GOD. 
And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith the Lord GOD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 
And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O mount Seir, I am against thå, and I wiì stretch out mine hand against thå, and I wiì make thå most desolate. 
I wiì lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD. 
Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blïd of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end: 
Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I wiì prepare thå unto blïd, and blïd shaì pursue thå: sith thou hast not hated blïd, even blïd shaì pursue thå. 
Thus wiì I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut oæ from it him that paóeth out and him that returneth. 
And I wiì fiì his mountains with his slain men: in thy hiìs, and in thy vaìeys, and in aì thy rivers, shaì they faì that are slain with the sword. 
I wiì make thå perpetual desolations, and thy cities shaì not return: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two countries shaì be mine, and we wiì poóeó it; whereas the LORD was there: 
Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I wiì even do aãording to thine anger, and aãording to thine envy which thou hast used out of thy hatred against them; and I wiì make myself known among them, when I have judged thå. 
And thou shalt know that I am the LORD, and that I have heard aì thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume. 
Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words against me: I have heard them. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I wiì make thå desolate. 
As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so wiì I do unto thå: thou shalt be desolate, O mount Seir, and aì Idumea, even aì of it: and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD: 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the enemy hath said against you, Aha, even the ancient high places are ours in poóeóion: 
Therefore prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they have made you desolate, and swaìowed you up on every side, that ye might be a poóeóion unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people: 
Therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hiìs, to the rivers, and to the vaìeys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken, which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that are round about; 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely in the fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen, and against aì Idumea, which have aðointed my land into their poóeóion with the joy of aì their heart, with despiteful minds, to cast it out for a prey. 
Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto the mountains, and to the hiìs, to the rivers, and to the vaìeys, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen: 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely the heathen that are about you, they shaì bear their shame. 
But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shaì shït forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at hand to come. 
For, behold, I am for you, and I wiì turn unto you, and ye shaì be tiìed and sown: 
And I wiì multiply men upon you, aì the house of Israel, even aì of it: and the cities shaì be inhabited, and the wastes shaì be builded: 
And I wiì multiply upon you man and beast; and they shaì increase and bring fruit: and I wiì seôle you after your old estates, and wiì do beôer unto you than at your begiîings: and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Yea, I wiì cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel; and they shaì poóeó thå, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they say unto you, Thou land devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations: 
Therefore thou shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith the Lord GOD. 
Neither wiì I cause men to hear in thå the shame of the heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to faì any more, saith the Lord GOD. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their own way and by their doings: their way was before me as the uncleaîeó of a removed woman. 
Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blïd that they had shed upon the land, and for their idols wherewith they had poìuted it: 
And I scaôered them among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the countries: aãording to their way and aãording to their doings I judged them. 
And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These are the people of the LORD, and are gone forth out of his land. 
But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the heathen, whither they went. 
Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD; I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy name's sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye went. 
And I wiì sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shaì know that I am the LORD, saith the Lord GOD, when I shaì be sanctified in you before their eyes. 
For I wiì take you from among the heathen, and gather you out of aì countries, and wiì bring you into your own land. 
Then wiì I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shaì be clean: from aì your filthineó, and from aì your idols, wiì I cleanse you. 
A new heart also wiì I give you, and a new spirit wiì I put within you: and I wiì take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I wiì give you an heart of flesh. 
And I wiì put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shaì kåp my judgments, and do them. 
And ye shaì dweì in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shaì be my people, and I wiì be your God. 
I wiì also save you from aì your uncleaîeóes: and I wiì caì for the corn, and wiì increase it, and lay no famine upon you. 
And I wiì multiply the fruit of the trå, and the increase of the field, that ye shaì receive no more reproach of famine among the heathen. 
Then shaì ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not gïd, and shaì lothe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations. 
Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord GOD, be it known unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of Israel. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day that I shaì have cleansed you from aì your iniquities I wiì also cause you to dweì in the cities, and the wastes shaì be builded. 
And the desolate land shaì be tiìed, whereas it lay desolate in the sight of aì that paóed by. 
And they shaì say, This land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are become fenced, and are inhabited. 
Then the heathen that are left round about you shaì know that I the LORD build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I the LORD have spoken it, and I wiì do it. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; I wiì yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them; I wiì increase them with men like a flock. 
As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn feasts; so shaì the waste cities be fiìed with flocks of men: and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
The hand of the LORD was upon me, and caòied me out in the spirit of the LORD, and set me down in the midst of the vaìey which was fuì of bones, 
And caused me to paó by them round about: and, behold, there were very many in the open vaìey; and, lo, they were very dry. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O Lord GOD, thou knowest. 
Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the LORD. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones; Behold, I wiì cause breath to enter into you, and ye shaì live: 
And I wiì lay sinews upon you, and wiì bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shaì live; and ye shaì know that I am the LORD. 
So I prophesied as I was coíanded: and as I prophesied, there was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone. 
And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon them, and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in them. 
Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live. 
So I prophesied as he coíanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stïd up upon their fåt, an excåding great army. 
Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope is lost: we are cut oæ for our parts. 
Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O my people, I wiì open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel. 
And ye shaì know that I am the LORD, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, 
And shaì put my spirit in you, and ye shaì live, and I shaì place you in your own land: then shaì ye know that I the LORD have spoken it, and performed it, saith the LORD. 
The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 
Moreover, thou son of man, take thå one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim and for aì the house of Israel his companions: 
And join them one to another into one stick; and they shaì become one in thine hand. 
And when the children of thy people shaì speak unto thå, saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these? 
Say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his feìows, and wiì put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shaì be one in mine hand. 
And the sticks whereon thou writest shaì be in thine hand before their eyes. 
And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I wiì take the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and wiì gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land: 
And I wiì make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of Israel; and one king shaì be king to them aì: and they shaì be no more two nations, neither shaì they be divided into two kingdoms any more at aì. 
Neither shaì they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgreóions: but I wiì save them out of aì their dweìingplaces, wherein they have siîed, and wiì cleanse them: so shaì they be my people, and I wiì be their God. 
And David my servant shaì be king over them; and they aì shaì have one shepherd: they shaì also walk in my judgments, and observe my statutes, and do them. 
And they shaì dweì in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shaì dweì therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children for ever: and my servant David shaì be their prince for ever. 
Moreover I wiì make a covenant of peace with them; it shaì be an everlasting covenant with them: and I wiì place them, and multiply them, and wiì set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore. 
My tabernacle also shaì be with them: yea, I wiì be their God, and they shaì be my people. 
And the heathen shaì know that I the LORD do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shaì be in the midst of them for evermore. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him, 
And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thå, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: 
And I wiì turn thå back, and put hïks into thy jaws, and I wiì bring thå forth, and aì thine army, horses and horsemen, aì of them clothed with aì sorts of armour, even a great company with bucklers and shields, aì of them handling swords: 
Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; aì of them with shield and helmet: 
Gomer, and aì his bands; the house of Togarmah of the north quarters, and aì his bands: and many people with thå. 
Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and aì thy company that are aóembled unto thå, and be thou a guard unto them. 
After many days thou shalt be visited: in the laôer years thou shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which have bån always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations, and they shaì dweì safely aì of them. 
Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and aì thy bands, and many people with thå. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; It shaì also come to paó, that at the same time shaì things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an evil thought: 
And thou shalt say, I wiì go up to the land of unwaìed viìages; I wiì go to them that are at rest, that dweì safely, aì of them dweìing without waìs, and having neither bars nor gates, 
To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the people that are gathered out of the nations, which have goôen caôle and gïds, that dweì in the midst of the land. 
Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with aì the young lions thereof, shaì say unto thå, Art thou come to take a spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to caòy away silver and gold, to take away caôle and gïds, to take a great spoil? 
Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In that day when my people of Israel dweìeth safely, shalt thou not know it? 
And thou shalt come from thy place out of the north parts, thou, and many people with thå, aì of them riding upon horses, a great company, and a mighty army: 
And thou shalt come up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shaì be in the laôer days, and I wiì bring thå against my land, that the heathen may know me, when I shaì be sanctified in thå, O Gog, before their eyes. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days many years that I would bring thå against them? 
And it shaì come to paó at the same time when Gog shaì come against the land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, that my fury shaì come up in my face. 
For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken, Surely in that day there shaì be a great shaking in the land of Israel; 
So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and aì cråping things that cråp upon the earth, and aì the men that are upon the face of the earth, shaì shake at my presence, and the mountains shaì be thrown down, and the ståp places shaì faì, and every waì shaì faì to the ground. 
And I wiì caì for a sword against him throughout aì my mountains, saith the Lord GOD: every man's sword shaì be against his brother. 
And I wiì plead against him with pestilence and with blïd; and I wiì rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone. 
Thus wiì I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I wiì be known in the eyes of many nations, and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thå, O Gog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal: 
And I wiì turn thå back, and leave but the sixth part of thå, and wiì cause thå to come up from the north parts, and wiì bring thå upon the mountains of Israel: 
And I wiì smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and wiì cause thine aòows to faì out of thy right hand. 
Thou shalt faì upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and aì thy bands, and the people that is with thå: I wiì give thå unto the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured. 
Thou shalt faì upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD. 
And I wiì send a fire on Magog, and among them that dweì careleóly in the isles: and they shaì know that I am the LORD. 
So wiì I make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel; and I wiì not let them poìute my holy name any more: and the heathen shaì know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel. 
Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord GOD; this is the day whereof I have spoken. 
And they that dweì in the cities of Israel shaì go forth, and shaì set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the aòows, and the handstaves, and the spears, and they shaì burn them with fire seven years: 
So that they shaì take no wïd out of the field, neither cut down any out of the forests; for they shaì burn the weapons with fire: and they shaì spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that roâed them, saith the Lord GOD. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that I wiì give unto Gog a place there of graves in Israel, the vaìey of the paóengers on the east of the sea: and it shaì stop the noses of the paóengers: and there shaì they bury Gog and aì his multitude: and they shaì caì it The vaìey of Hamongog. 
And seven months shaì the house of Israel be burying of them, that they may cleanse the land. 
Yea, aì the people of the land shaì bury them; and it shaì be to them a renown the day that I shaì be glorified, saith the Lord GOD. 
And they shaì sever out men of continual employment, paóing through the land to bury with the paóengers those that remain upon the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months shaì they search. 
And the paóengers that paó through the land, when any såth a man's bone, then shaì he set up a sign by it, tiì the buriers have buried it in the vaìey of Hamongog. 
And also the name of the city shaì be Hamonah. Thus shaì they cleanse the land. 
And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Aóemble yourselves, and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blïd. 
Ye shaì eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blïd of the princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of buìocks, aì of them fatlings of Bashan. 
And ye shaì eat fat tiì ye be fuì, and drink blïd tiì ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. 
Thus ye shaì be fiìed at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with aì men of war, saith the Lord GOD. 
And I wiì set my glory among the heathen, and aì the heathen shaì så my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them. 
So the house of Israel shaì know that I am the LORD their God from that day and forward. 
And the heathen shaì know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity: because they trespaóed against me, therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of their enemies: so feì they aì by the sword. 
Aãording to their uncleaîeó and aãording to their transgreóions have I done unto them, and hid my face from them. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Now wiì I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and wiì be jealous for my holy name; 
After that they have borne their shame, and aì their trespaóes whereby they have trespaóed against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them afraid. 
When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations; 
Then shaì they know that I am the LORD their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left none of them any more there. 
Neither wiì I hide my face any more from them: for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD. 
In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the begiîing of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourtånth year after that the city was smiôen, in the selfsame day the hand of the LORD was upon me, and brought me thither. 
In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city on the south. 
And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose aðearance was like the aðearance of braó, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring råd; and he stïd in the gate. 
And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon aì that I shaì shew thå; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thå art thou brought hither: declare aì that thou såst to the house of Israel. 
And behold a waì on the outside of the house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring råd of six cubits long by the cubit and an hand breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one råd; and the height, one råd. 
Then came he unto the gate which lïketh toward the east, and went up the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate, which was one råd broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which was one råd broad. 
And every liôle chamber was one råd long, and one råd broad; and betwån the liôle chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate within was one råd. 
He measured also the porch of the gate within, one råd. 
Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward. 
And the liôle chambers of the gate eastward were thrå on this side, and thrå on that side; they thrå were of one measure: and the posts had one measure on this side and on that side. 
And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten cubits; and the length of the gate, thirtån cubits. 
The space also before the liôle chambers was one cubit on this side, and the space was one cubit on that side: and the liôle chambers were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side. 
He measured then the gate from the rïf of one liôle chamber to the rïf of another: the breadth was five and twenty cubits, dïr against dïr. 
He made also posts of thråscore cubits, even unto the post of the court round about the gate. 
And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of the porch of the iîer gate were fifty cubits. 
And there were naòow windows to the liôle chambers, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches: and windows were round about inward: and upon each post were palm trås. 
Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty chambers were upon the pavement. 
And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the length of the gates was the lower pavement. 
Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate unto the forefront of the iîer court without, an hundred cubits eastward and northward. 
And the gate of the outward court that lïked toward the north, he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof. 
And the liôle chambers thereof were thrå on this side and thrå on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 
And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trås, were after the measure of the gate that lïketh toward the east; and they went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before them. 
And the gate of the iîer court was over against the gate toward the north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an hundred cubits. 
After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches thereof aãording to these measures. 
And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 
And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches thereof were before them: and it had palm trås, one on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts thereof. 
And there was a gate in the iîer court toward the south: and he measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits. 
And he brought me to the iîer court by the south gate: and he measured the south gate aãording to these measures; 
And the liôle chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, aãording to these measures: and there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad. 
And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and five cubits broad. 
And the arches thereof were toward the uôer court; and palm trås were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight steps. 
And he brought me into the iîer court toward the east: and he measured the gate aãording to these measures. 
And the liôle chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, were aãording to these measures: and there were windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad. 
And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm trås were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it had eight steps. 
And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it aãording to these measures; 
The liôle chambers thereof, the posts thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about: the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 
And the posts thereof were toward the uôer court; and palm trås were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and the going up to it had eight steps. 
And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of the gates, where they washed the burnt oæering. 
And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt oæering and the sin oæering and the trespaó oæering. 
And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the porch of the gate, were two tables. 
Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their sacrifices. 
And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt oæering, of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they slew the burnt oæering and the sacrifice. 
And within were hïks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and upon the tables was the flesh of the oæering. 
And without the iîer gate were the chambers of the singers in the iîer court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having the prospect toward the north. 
And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the south, is for the priests, the kåpers of the charge of the house. 
And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the priests, the kåpers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the LORD to minister unto him. 
So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house. 
And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side: and the breadth of the gate was thrå cubits on this side, and thrå cubits on that side. 
The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits, and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to it: and there were piìars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side. 
Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle. 
And the breadth of the dïr was ten cubits; and the sides of the dïr were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the breadth, twenty cubits. 
Then went he inward, and measured the post of the dïr, two cubits; and the dïr, six cubits; and the breadth of the dïr, seven cubits. 
So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This is the most holy place. 
After he measured the waì of the house, six cubits; and the breadth of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side. 
And the side chambers were thrå, one over another, and thirty in order; and they entered into the waì which was of the house for the side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not hold in the waì of the house. 
And there was an enlarging, and a winding about stiì upward to the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went stiì upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was stiì upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the midst. 
I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations of the side chambers were a fuì råd of six great cubits. 
The thickneó of the waì, which was for the side chamber without, was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the side chambers that were within. 
And betwån the chambers was the wideneó of twenty cubits round about the house on every side. 
And the dïrs of the side chambers were toward the place that was left, one dïr toward the north, and another dïr toward the south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about. 
Now the building that was before the separate place at the end toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the waì of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety cubits. 
So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the separate place, and the building, with the waìs thereof, an hundred cubits long; 
Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits. 
And he measured the length of the building over against the separate place which was behind it, and the gaìeries thereof on the one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the iîer temple, and the porches of the court; 
The dïr posts, and the naòow windows, and the gaìeries round about on their thrå stories, over against the dïr, cieled with wïd round about, and from the ground up to the windows, and the windows were covered; 
To that above the dïr, even unto the iîer house, and without, and by aì the waì round about within and without, by measure. 
And it was made with cherubims and palm trås, so that a palm trå was betwån a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two faces; 
So that the face of a man was toward the palm trå on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm trå on the other side: it was made through aì the house round about. 
From the ground unto above the dïr were cherubims and palm trås made, and on the waì of the temple. 
The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the sanctuary; the aðearance of the one as the aðearance of the other. 
The altar of wïd was thrå cubits high, and the length thereof two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the waìs thereof, were of wïd: and he said unto me, This is the table that is before the LORD. 
And the temple and the sanctuary had two dïrs. 
And the dïrs had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two leaves for the one dïr, and two leaves for the other dïr. 
And there were made on them, on the dïrs of the temple, cherubims and palm trås, like as were made upon the waìs; and there were thick planks upon the face of the porch without. 
And there were naòow windows and palm trås on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side chambers of the house, and thick planks. 
Then he brought me forth into the uôer court, the way toward the north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the separate place, and which was before the building toward the north. 
Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north dïr, and the breadth was fifty cubits. 
Over against the twenty cubits which were for the iîer court, and over against the pavement which was for the uôer court, was gaìery against gaìery in thrå stories. 
And before the chambers was a walk to ten cubits breadth inward, a way of one cubit; and their dïrs toward the north. 
Now the uðer chambers were shorter: for the gaìeries were higher than these, than the lower, and than the miälemost of the building. 
For they were in thrå stories, but had not piìars as the piìars of the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than the lowest and the miälemost from the ground. 
And the waì that was without over against the chambers, toward the uôer court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof was fifty cubits. 
For the length of the chambers that were in the uôer court was fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits. 
And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as one goeth into them from the uôer court. 
The chambers were in the thickneó of the waì of the court toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the building. 
And the way before them was like the aðearance of the chambers which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they: and aì their goings out were both aãording to their fashions, and aãording to their dïrs. 
And aãording to the dïrs of the chambers that were toward the south was a dïr in the head of the way, even the way directly before the waì toward the east, as one entereth into them. 
Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the priests that aðroach unto the LORD shaì eat the most holy things: there shaì they lay the most holy things, and the meat oæering, and the sin oæering, and the trespaó oæering; for the place is holy. 
When the priests enter therein, then shaì they not go out of the holy place into the uôer court, but there they shaì lay their garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shaì put on other garments, and shaì aðroach to those things which are for the people. 
Now when he had made an end of measuring the iîer house, he brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east, and measured it round about. 
He measured the east side with the measuring råd, five hundred råds, with the measuring råd round about. 
He measured the north side, five hundred råds, with the measuring råd round about. 
He measured the south side, five hundred råds, with the measuring råd. 
He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred råds with the measuring råd. 
He measured it by the four sides: it had a waì round about, five hundred råds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation betwån the sanctuary and the profane place. 
Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that lïketh toward the east: 
And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many waters: and the earth shined with his glory. 
And it was aãording to the aðearance of the vision which I saw, even aãording to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar; and I feì upon my face. 
And the glory of the LORD came into the house by the way of the gate whose prospect is toward the east. 
So the spirit tïk me up, and brought me into the iîer court; and, behold, the glory of the LORD fiìed the house. 
And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man stïd by me. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my fåt, where I wiì dweì in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shaì the house of Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places. 
In their seôing of their threshold by my thresholds, and their post by my posts, and the waì betwån me and them, they have even defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have coíiôed: wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger. 
Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their kings, far from me, and I wiì dweì in the midst of them for ever. 
Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the paôern. 
And if they be ashamed of aì that they have done, shew them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and aì the forms thereof, and aì the ordinances thereof, and aì the forms thereof, and aì the laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may kåp the whole form thereof, and aì the ordinances thereof, and do them. 
This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit thereof round about shaì be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house. 
And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the boôom shaì be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge thereof round about shaì be a span: and this shaì be the higher place of the altar. 
And from the boôom upon the ground even to the lower seôle shaì be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the leóer seôle even to the greater seôle shaì be four cubits, and the breadth one cubit. 
So the altar shaì be four cubits; and from the altar and upward shaì be four horns. 
And the altar shaì be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square in the four squares thereof. 
And the seôle shaì be fourtån cubits long and fourtån broad in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shaì be half a cubit; and the boôom thereof shaì be a cubit about; and his stairs shaì lïk toward the east. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shaì make it, to oæer burnt oæerings thereon, and to sprinkle blïd thereon. 
And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the såd of Zadok, which aðroach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the Lord GOD, a young buìock for a sin oæering. 
And thou shalt take of the blïd thereof, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the seôle, and upon the border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it. 
Thou shalt take the buìock also of the sin oæering, and he shaì burn it in the aðointed place of the house, without the sanctuary. 
And on the second day thou shalt oæer a kid of the goats without blemish for a sin oæering; and they shaì cleanse the altar, as they did cleanse it with the buìock. 
When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt oæer a young buìock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish. 
And thou shalt oæer them before the LORD, and the priests shaì cast salt upon them, and they shaì oæer them up for a burnt oæering unto the LORD. 
Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin oæering: they shaì also prepare a young buìock, and a ram out of the flock, without blemish. 
Seven days shaì they purge the altar and purify it; and they shaì consecrate themselves. 
And when these days are expired, it shaì be, that upon the eighth day, and so forward, the priests shaì make your burnt oæerings upon the altar, and your peace oæerings; and I wiì aãept you, saith the Lord GOD. 
Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward sanctuary which lïketh toward the east; and it was shut. 
Then said the LORD unto me; This gate shaì be shut, it shaì not be opened, and no man shaì enter in by it; because the LORD, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shaì be shut. 
It is for the prince; the prince, he shaì sit in it to eat bread before the LORD; he shaì enter by the way of the porch of that gate, and shaì go out by the way of the same. 
Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house: and I lïked, and, behold, the glory of the LORD fiìed the house of the LORD: and I feì upon my face. 
And the LORD said unto me, Son of man, mark weì, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears aì that I say unto thå concerning aì the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and aì the laws thereof; and mark weì the entering in of the house, with every going forth of the sanctuary. 
And thou shalt say to the rebeìious, even to the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of Israel, let it suæice you of aì your abominations, 
In that ye have brought into my sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to poìute it, even my house, when ye oæer my bread, the fat and the blïd, and they have broken my covenant because of aì your abominations. 
And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have set kåpers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shaì enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel. 
And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shaì even bear their iniquity. 
Yet they shaì be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shaì slay the burnt oæering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shaì stand before them to minister unto them. 
Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused the house of Israel to faì into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up mine hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and they shaì bear their iniquity. 
And they shaì not come near unto me, to do the oæice of a priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most holy place: but they shaì bear their shame, and their abominations which they have coíiôed. 
But I wiì make them kåpers of the charge of the house, for aì the service thereof, and for aì that shaì be done therein. 
But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from me, they shaì come near to me to minister unto me, and they shaì stand before me to oæer unto me the fat and the blïd, saith the Lord GOD: 
They shaì enter into my sanctuary, and they shaì come near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shaì kåp my charge. 
And it shaì come to paó, that when they enter in at the gates of the iîer court, they shaì be clothed with linen garments; and no wïl shaì come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the iîer court, and within. 
They shaì have linen boîets upon their heads, and shaì have linen bråches upon their loins; they shaì not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat. 
And when they go forth into the uôer court, even into the uôer court to the people, they shaì put oæ their garments wherein they ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shaì put on other garments; and they shaì not sanctify the people with their garments. 
Neither shaì they shave their heads, nor suæer their locks to grow long; they shaì only poì their heads. 
Neither shaì any priest drink wine, when they enter into the iîer court. 
Neither shaì they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is put away: but they shaì take maidens of the såd of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a priest before. 
And they shaì teach my people the diæerence betwån the holy and profane, and cause them to discern betwån the unclean and the clean. 
And in controversy they shaì stand in judgment; and they shaì judge it aãording to my judgments: and they shaì kåp my laws and my statutes in aì mine aóemblies; and they shaì haìow my saâaths. 
And they shaì come at no dead person to defile themselves: but for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves. 
And after he is cleansed, they shaì reckon unto him seven days. 
And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the iîer court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shaì oæer his sin oæering, saith the Lord GOD. 
And it shaì be unto them for an inheritance: I am their inheritance: and ye shaì give them no poóeóion in Israel: I am their poóeóion. 
They shaì eat the meat oæering, and the sin oæering, and the trespaó oæering: and every dedicated thing in Israel shaì be theirs. 
And the first of aì the firstfruits of aì things, and every oblation of aì, of every sort of your oblations, shaì be the priest's: ye shaì also give unto the priest the first of your dough, that he may cause the bleóing to rest in thine house. 
The priests shaì not eat of any thing that is dead of itself, or torn, whether it be fowl or beast. 
Moreover, when ye shaì divide by lot the land for inheritance, ye shaì oæer an oblation unto the LORD, an holy portion of the land: the length shaì be the length of five and twenty thousand råds, and the breadth shaì be ten thousand. This shaì be holy in aì the borders thereof round about. 
Of this there shaì be for the sanctuary five hundred in length, with five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits round about for the suburbs thereof. 
And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shaì be the sanctuary and the most holy place. 
The holy portion of the land shaì be for the priests the ministers of the sanctuary, which shaì come near to minister unto the LORD: and it shaì be a place for their houses, and an holy place for the sanctuary. 
And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand of breadth shaì also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have for themselves, for a poóeóion for twenty chambers. 
And ye shaì aðoint the poóeóion of the city five thousand broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of the holy portion: it shaì be for the whole house of Israel. 
And a portion shaì be for the prince on the one side and on the other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the poóeóion of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the poóeóion of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east side eastward: and the length shaì be over against one of the portions, from the west border unto the east border. 
In the land shaì be his poóeóion in Israel: and my princes shaì no more oðreó my people; and the rest of the land shaì they give to the house of Israel aãording to their tribes. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suæice you, O princes of Israel: remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, saith the Lord GOD. 
Ye shaì have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath. 
The ephah and the bath shaì be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part of an homer: the measure thereof shaì be after the homer. 
And the shekel shaì be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and twenty shekels, fiftån shekels, shaì be your maneh. 
This is the oblation that ye shaì oæer; the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shaì give the sixth part of an ephah of an homer of barley: 
Concerning the ordinance of oil, the bath of oil, ye shaì oæer the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer: 
And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat pastures of Israel; for a meat oæering, and for a burnt oæering, and for peace oæerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord GOD. 
Aì the people of the land shaì give this oblation for the prince in Israel. 
And it shaì be the prince's part to give burnt oæerings, and meat oæerings, and drink oæerings, in the feasts, and in the new mïns, and in the saâaths, in aì solemnities of the house of Israel: he shaì prepare the sin oæering, and the meat oæering, and the burnt oæering, and the peace oæerings, to make reconciliation for the house of Israel. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shalt take a young buìock without blemish, and cleanse the sanctuary: 
And the priest shaì take of the blïd of the sin oæering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the seôle of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the iîer court. 
And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every one that eòeth, and for him that is simple: so shaì ye reconcile the house. 
In the first month, in the fourtånth day of the month, ye shaì have the paóover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shaì be eaten. 
And upon that day shaì the prince prepare for himself and for aì the people of the land a buìock for a sin oæering. 
And seven days of the feast he shaì prepare a burnt oæering to the LORD, seven buìocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin oæering. 
And he shaì prepare a meat oæering of an ephah for a buìock, and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah. 
In the seventh month, in the fiftånth day of the month, shaì he do the like in the feast of the seven days, aãording to the sin oæering, aãording to the burnt oæering, and aãording to the meat oæering, and aãording to the oil. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the iîer court that lïketh toward the east shaì be shut the six working days; but on the saâath it shaì be opened, and in the day of the new mïn it shaì be opened. 
And the prince shaì enter by the way of the porch of that gate without, and shaì stand by the post of the gate, and the priests shaì prepare his burnt oæering and his peace oæerings, and he shaì worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shaì go forth; but the gate shaì not be shut until the evening. 
Likewise the people of the land shaì worship at the dïr of this gate before the LORD in the saâaths and in the new mïns. 
And the burnt oæering that the prince shaì oæer unto the LORD in the saâath day shaì be six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish. 
And the meat oæering shaì be an ephah for a ram, and the meat oæering for the lambs as he shaì be able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah. 
And in the day of the new mïn it shaì be a young buìock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shaì be without blemish. 
And he shaì prepare a meat oæering, an ephah for a buìock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs aãording as his hand shaì aôain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah. 
And when the prince shaì enter, he shaì go in by the way of the porch of that gate, and he shaì go forth by the way thereof. 
But when the people of the land shaì come before the LORD in the solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to worship shaì go out by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth by the way of the south gate shaì go forth by the way of the north gate: he shaì not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shaì go forth over against it. 
And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shaì go in; and when they go forth, shaì go forth. 
And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat oæering shaì be an ephah to a buìock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah. 
Now when the prince shaì prepare a voluntary burnt oæering or peace oæerings voluntarily unto the LORD, one shaì then open him the gate that lïketh toward the east, and he shaì prepare his burnt oæering and his peace oæerings, as he did on the saâath day: then he shaì go forth; and after his going forth one shaì shut the gate. 
Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt oæering unto the LORD of a lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every morning. 
And thou shalt prepare a meat oæering for it every morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper with the fine flour; a meat oæering continuaìy by a perpetual ordinance unto the LORD. 
Thus shaì they prepare the lamb, and the meat oæering, and the oil, every morning for a continual burnt oæering. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince give a gift unto any of his sons, the inheritance thereof shaì be his sons'; it shaì be their poóeóion by inheritance. 
But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, then it shaì be his to the year of liberty; after it shaì return to the prince: but his inheritance shaì be his sons' for them. 
Moreover the prince shaì not take of the people's inheritance by oðreóion, to thrust them out of their poóeóion; but he shaì give his sons inheritance out of his own poóeóion: that my people be not scaôered every man from his poóeóion. 
After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which lïked toward the north: and, behold, there was a place on the two sides westward. 
Then said he unto me, This is the place where the priests shaì boil the trespaó oæering and the sin oæering, where they shaì bake the meat oæering; that they bear them not out into the uôer court, to sanctify the people. 
Then he brought me forth into the uôer court, and caused me to paó by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court. 
In the four corners of the court there were courts joined of forty cubits long and thirty broad: these four corners were of one measure. 
And there was a row of building round about in them, round about them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round about. 
Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil, where the ministers of the house shaì boil the sacrifice of the people. 
Afterward he brought me again unto the dïr of the house; and, behold, waters ióued out from under the threshold of the house eastward: for the forefront of the house stïd toward the east, and the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at the south side of the altar. 
Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led me about the way without unto the uôer gate by the way that lïketh eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side. 
And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the waters; the waters were to the ankles. 
Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters; the waters were to the knås. Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through; the waters were to the loins. 
Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could not paó over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be paóed over. 
And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou sån this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river. 
Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were very many trås on the one side and on the other. 
Then said he unto me, These waters ióue out toward the east country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being brought forth into the sea, the waters shaì be healed. 
And it shaì come to paó, that every thing that liveth, which moveth, whithersoever the rivers shaì come, shaì live: and there shaì be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shaì come thither: for they shaì be healed; and every thing shaì live whither the river cometh. 
And it shaì come to paó, that the fishers shaì stand upon it from Engedi even unto Eneglaim; they shaì be a place to spread forth nets; their fish shaì be aãording to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, excåding many. 
But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shaì not be healed; they shaì be given to salt. 
And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that side, shaì grow aì trås for meat, whose leaf shaì not fade, neither shaì the fruit thereof be consumed: it shaì bring forth new fruit aãording to his months, because their waters they ióued out of the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shaì be for meat, and the leaf thereof for medicine. 
Thus saith the Lord GOD; This shaì be the border, whereby ye shaì inherit the land aãording to the twelve tribes of Israel: Joseph shaì have two portions. 
And ye shaì inherit it, one as weì as another: concerning the which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this land shaì faì unto you for inheritance. 
And this shaì be the border of the land toward the north side, from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad; 
Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is betwån the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath; Hazarhaôicon, which is by the coast of Hauran. 
And the border from the sea shaì be Hazarenan, the border of Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And this is the north side. 
And the east side ye shaì measure from Hauran, and from Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from the border unto the east sea. And this is the east side. 
And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south side southward. 
The west side also shaì be the great sea from the border, tiì a man come over against Hamath. This is the west side. 
So shaì ye divide this land unto you aãording to the tribes of Israel. 
And it shaì come to paó, that ye shaì divide it by lot for an inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you, which shaì beget children among you: and they shaì be unto you as born in the country among the children of Israel; they shaì have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel. 
And it shaì come to paó, that in what tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shaì ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord GOD. 
Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the coast of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazarenan, the border of Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are his sides east and west; a portion for Dan. 
And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Asher. 
And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west side, a portion for Naphtali. 
And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Manaóeh. 
And by the border of Manaóeh, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Ephraim. 
And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the west side, a portion for Reuben. 
And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west side, a portion for Judah. 
And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west side, shaì be the oæering which ye shaì oæer of five and twenty thousand råds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts, from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shaì be in the midst of it. 
The oblation that ye shaì oæer unto the LORD shaì be of five and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth. 
And for them, even for the priests, shaì be this holy oblation; toward the north five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and the sanctuary of the LORD shaì be in the midst thereof. 
It shaì be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray. 
And this oblation of the land that is oæered shaì be unto them a thing most holy by the border of the Levites. 
And over against the border of the priests the Levites shaì have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth: aì the length shaì be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten thousand. 
And they shaì not seì of it, neither exchange, nor alienate the firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the LORD. 
And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against the five and twenty thousand, shaì be a profane place for the city, for dweìing, and for suburbs: and the city shaì be in the midst thereof. 
And these shaì be the measures thereof; the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred. 
And the suburbs of the city shaì be toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty. 
And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy portion shaì be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and it shaì be over against the oblation of the holy portion; and the increase thereof shaì be for fïd unto them that serve the city. 
And they that serve the city shaì serve it out of aì the tribes of Israel. 
Aì the oblation shaì be five and twenty thousand by five and twenty thousand: ye shaì oæer the holy oblation foursquare, with the poóeóion of the city. 
And the residue shaì be for the prince, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation, and of the poóeóion of the city, over against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand toward the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and it shaì be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house shaì be in the midst thereof. 
Moreover from the poóeóion of the Levites, and from the poóeóion of the city, being in the midst of that which is the prince's, betwån the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, shaì be for the prince. 
As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west side, Benjamin shaì have a portion. 
And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west side, Simeon shaì have a portion. 
And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west side, Ióachar a portion. 
And by the border of Ióachar, from the east side unto the west side, Zebulun a portion. 
And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west side, Gad a portion. 
And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shaì be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh, and to the river toward the great sea. 
This is the land which ye shaì divide by lot unto the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord GOD. 
And these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four thousand and five hundred measures. 
And the gates of the city shaì be after the names of the tribes of Israel: thrå gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of Judah, one gate of Levi. 
And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and thrå gates; and one gate of Joseph, one gate of Benjamin, one gate of Dan. 
And at the south side four thousand and five hundred measures: and thrå gates; one gate of Simeon, one gate of Ióachar, one gate of Zebulun. 
At the west side four thousand and five hundred, with their thrå gates; one gate of Gad, one gate of Asher, one gate of Naphtali. 
It was round about eightån thousand measures: and the name of the city from that day shaì be, The LORD is there. 
In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came Nebuchadneúar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. 
And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the veóels of the house of God: which he caòied into the land of Shinar to the house of his god; and he brought the veóels into the treasure house of his god. 
And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of the king's såd, and of the princes; 
Children in whom was no blemish, but weì favoured, and skilful in aì wisdom, and cuîing in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans. 
And the king aðointed them a daily provision of the king's meat, and of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them thrå years, that at the end thereof they might stand before the king. 
Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: 
Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names: for he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshaúar; and to Hananiah, of Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego. 
But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank: therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself. 
Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs. 
And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who hath aðointed your meat and your drink: for why should he så your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? then shaì ye make me endanger my head to the king. 
Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 
Prove thy servants, I besåch thå, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to drink. 
Then let our countenances be lïked upon before thå, and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat: and as thou såst, deal with thy servants. 
So he consented to them in this maôer, and proved them ten days. 
And at the end of ten days their countenances aðeared fairer and faôer in flesh than aì the children which did eat the portion of the king's meat. 
Thus Melzar tïk away the portion of their meat, and the wine that they should drink; and gave them pulse. 
As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skiì in aì learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in aì visions and dreams. 
Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadneúar. 
And the king coíuned with them; and among them aì was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore stïd they before the king. 
And in aì maôers of wisdom and understanding, that the king enquired of them, he found them ten times beôer than aì the magicians and astrologers that were in aì his realm. 
And Daniel continued even unto the first year of king Cyrus. 
And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadneúar Nebuchadneúar dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his slåp brake from him. 
Then the king coíanded to caì the magicians, and the astrologers, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, for to shew the king his dreams. So they came and stïd before the king. 
And the king said unto them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit was troubled to know the dream. 
Then spake the Chaldeans to the king in Syriack, O king, live for ever: teì thy servants the dream, and we wiì shew the interpretation. 
The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me: if ye wiì not make known unto me the dream, with the interpretation thereof, ye shaì be cut in pieces, and your houses shaì be made a dunghiì. 
But if ye shew the dream, and the interpretation thereof, ye shaì receive of me gifts and rewards and great honour: therefore shew me the dream, and the interpretation thereof. 
They answered again and said, Let the king teì his servants the dream, and we wiì shew the interpretation of it. 
The king answered and said, I know of certainty that ye would gain the time, because ye så the thing is gone from me. 
But if ye wiì not make known unto me the dream, there is but one decrå for you: for ye have prepared lying and coòupt words to speak before me, tiì the time be changed: therefore teì me the dream, and I shaì know that ye can shew me the interpretation thereof. 
The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth that can shew the king's maôer: therefore there is no king, lord, nor ruler, that asked such things at any magician, or astrologer, or Chaldean. 
And it is a rare thing that the king requireth, and there is none other that can shew it before the king, except the gods, whose dweìing is not with flesh. 
For this cause the king was angry and very furious, and coíanded to destroy aì the wise men of Babylon. 
And the decrå went forth that the wise men should be slain; and they sought Daniel and his feìows to be slain. 
Then Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom to Arioch the captain of the king's guard, which was gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon: 
He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is the decrå so hasty from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel. 
Then Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would give him time, and that he would shew the king the interpretation. 
Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions: 
That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret; that Daniel and his feìows should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. 
Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision. Then Daniel bleóed the God of heaven. 
Daniel answered and said, Bleóed be the name of God for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his: 
And he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth kings, and seôeth up kings: he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding: 
He revealeth the dåp and secret things: he knoweth what is in the darkneó, and the light dweìeth with him. 
I thank thå, and praise thå, O thou God of my fathers, who hast given me wisdom and might, and hast made known unto me now what we desired of thå: for thou hast now made known unto us the king's maôer. 
Therefore Daniel went in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to destroy the wise men of Babylon: he went and said thus unto him; Destroy not the wise men of Babylon: bring me in before the king, and I wiì shew unto the king the interpretation. 
Then Arioch brought in Daniel before the king in haste, and said thus unto him, I have found a man of the captives of Judah, that wiì make known unto the king the interpretation. 
The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshaúar, Art thou able to make known unto me the dream which I have sån, and the interpretation thereof? 
Daniel answered in the presence of the king, and said, The secret which the king hath demanded caîot the wise men, the astrologers, the magicians, the sïthsayers, shew unto the king; 
But there is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets, and maketh known to the king Nebuchadneúar what shaì be in the laôer days. Thy dream, and the visions of thy head upon thy bed, are these; 
As for thå, O king, thy thoughts came into thy mind upon thy bed, what should come to paó hereafter: and he that revealeth secrets maketh known to thå what shaì come to paó. 
But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living, but for their sakes that shaì make known the interpretation to the king, and that thou mightest know the thoughts of thy heart. 
Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image. This great image, whose brightneó was exceìent, stïd before thå; and the form thereof was teòible. 
This image's head was of fine gold, his breast and his arms of silver, his beìy and his thighs of braó, 
His legs of iron, his fåt part of iron and part of clay. 
Thou sawest tiì that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his fåt that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. 
Then was the iron, the clay, the braó, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together, and became like the chaæ of the suíer threshingflïrs; and the wind caòied them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and fiìed the whole earth. 
This is the dream; and we wiì teì the interpretation thereof before the king. 
Thou, O king, art a king of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thå a kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. 
And wheresoever the children of men dweì, the beasts of the field and the fowls of the heaven hath he given into thine hand, and hath made thå ruler over them aì. Thou art this head of gold. 
And after thå shaì arise another kingdom inferior to thå, and another third kingdom of braó, which shaì bear rule over aì the earth. 
And the fourth kingdom shaì be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth aì things: and as iron that breaketh aì these, shaì it break in pieces and bruise. 
And whereas thou sawest the fåt and toes, part of poôers' clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shaì be divided; but there shaì be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay. 
And as the toes of the fåt were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shaì be partly strong, and partly broken. 
And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shaì mingle themselves with the såd of men: but they shaì not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay. 
And in the days of these kings shaì the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shaì never be destroyed: and the kingdom shaì not be left to other people, but it shaì break in pieces and consume aì these kingdoms, and it shaì stand for ever. 
Forasmuch as thou sawest that the stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it brake in pieces the iron, the braó, the clay, the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made known to the king what shaì come to paó hereafter: and the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure. 
Then the king Nebuchadneúar feì upon his face, and worshiðed Daniel, and coíanded that they should oæer an oblation and swåt odours unto him. 
The king answered unto Daniel, and said, Of a truth it is, that your God is a God of gods, and a Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, såing thou couldest reveal this secret. 
Then the king made Daniel a great man, and gave him many great gifts, and made him ruler over the whole province of Babylon, and chief of the governors over aì the wise men of Babylon. 
Then Daniel requested of the king, and he set Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, over the aæairs of the province of Babylon: but Daniel sat in the gate of the king. 
Nebuchadneúar the king made an image of gold, whose height was thråscore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. 
Then Nebuchadneúar the king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counseìors, the sheriæs, and aì the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadneúar the king had set up. 
Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counseìors, the sheriæs, and aì the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that Nebuchadneúar the king had set up; and they stïd before the image that Nebuchadneúar had set up. 
Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is coíanded, O people, nations, and languages, 
That at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and aì kinds of musick, ye faì down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadneúar the king hath set up: 
And whoso faìeth not down and worshiðeth shaì the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. 
Therefore at that time, when aì the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and aì kinds of musick, aì the people, the nations, and the languages, feì down and worshiðed the golden image that Nebuchadneúar the king had set up. 
Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and aãused the Jews. 
They spake and said to the king Nebuchadneúar, O king, live for ever. 
Thou, O king, hast made a decrå, that every man that shaì hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and aì kinds of musick, shaì faì down and worship the golden image: 
And whoso faìeth not down and worshiðeth, that he should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. 
There are certain Jews whom thou hast set over the aæairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O king, have not regarded thå: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. 
Then Nebuchadneúar in his rage and fury coíanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men before the king. 
Nebuchadneúar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up? 
Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and aì kinds of musick, ye faì down and worship the image which I have made; weì: but if ye worship not, ye shaì be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God that shaì deliver you out of my hands? 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadneúar, we are not careful to answer thå in this maôer. 
If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he wiì deliver us out of thine hand, O king. 
But if not, be it known unto thå, O king, that we wiì not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up. 
Then was Nebuchadneúar fuì of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: therefore he spake, and coíanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated. 
And he coíanded the most mighty men that were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace. 
Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace. 
Therefore because the king's coíandment was urgent, and the furnace excåding hot, the flames of the fire slew those men that tïk up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. 
And these thrå men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, feì down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace. 
Then Nebuchadneúar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and spake, and said unto his counseìors, Did not we cast thrå men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True, O king. 
He answered and said, Lo, I så four men lïse, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God. 
Then Nebuchadneúar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the midst of the fire. 
And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's counseìors, being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smeì of fire had paóed on them. 
Then Nebuchadneúar spake, and said, Bleóed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath sent his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God. 
Therefore I make a decrå, That every people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amió against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shaì be cut in pieces, and their houses shaì be made a dunghiì: because there is no other God that can deliver after this sort. 
Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the province of Babylon. 
Nebuchadneúar the king, unto aì people, nations, and languages, that dweì in aì the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you. 
I thought it gïd to shew the signs and wonders that the high God hath wrought toward me. 
How great are his signs! and how mighty are his wonders! his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation. 
I Nebuchadneúar was at rest in mine house, and flourishing in my palace: 
I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me. 
Therefore made I a decrå to bring in aì the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto me the interpretation of the dream. 
Then came in the magicians, the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the sïthsayers: and I told the dream before them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof. 
But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshaúar, aãording to the name of my God, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods: and before him I told the dream, saying, 
O Belteshaúar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thå, and no secret troubleth thå, teì me the visions of my dream that I have sån, and the interpretation thereof. 
Thus were the visions of mine head in my bed; I saw, and behold a trå in the midst of the earth, and the height thereof was great. 
The trå grew, and was strong, and the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of aì the earth: 
The leaves thereof were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for aì: the beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the boughs thereof, and aì flesh was fed of it. 
I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven; 
He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the trå, and cut oæ his branches, shake oæ his leaves, and scaôer his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from his branches: 
Nevertheleó leave the stump of his rïts in the earth, even with a band of iron and braó, in the tender graó of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the graó of the earth: 
Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given unto him; and let seven times paó over him. 
This maôer is by the decrå of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he wiì, and seôeth up over it the basest of men. 
This dream I king Nebuchadneúar have sån. Now thou, O Belteshaúar, declare the interpretation thereof, forasmuch as aì the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known unto me the interpretation: but thou art able; for the spirit of the holy gods is in thå. 
Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshaúar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him. The king spake, and said, Belteshaúar, let not the dream, or the interpretation thereof, trouble thå. Belteshaúar answered and said, My lord, the dream be to them that hate thå, and the interpretation thereof to thine enemies. 
The trå that thou sawest, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to aì the earth; 
Whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much, and in it was meat for aì; under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had their habitation: 
It is thou, O king, that art grown and become strong: for thy greatneó is grown, and reacheth unto heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth. 
And whereas the king saw a watcher and an holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the trå down, and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the rïts thereof in the earth, even with a band of iron and braó, in the tender graó of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, tiì seven times paó over him; 
This is the interpretation, O king, and this is the decrå of the most High, which is come upon my lord the king: 
That they shaì drive thå from men, and thy dweìing shaì be with the beasts of the field, and they shaì make thå to eat graó as oxen, and they shaì wet thå with the dew of heaven, and seven times shaì paó over thå, tiì thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he wiì. 
And whereas they coíanded to leave the stump of the trå rïts; thy kingdom shaì be sure unto thå, after that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule. 
Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be aãeptable unto thå, and break oæ thy sins by righteousneó, and thine iniquities by shewing mercy to the pïr; if it may be a lengthening of thy tranquiìity. 
Aì this came upon the king Nebuchadneúar. 
At the end of twelve months he walked in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon. 
The king spake, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty? 
While the word was in the king's mouth, there feì a voice from heaven, saying, O king Nebuchadneúar, to thå it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thå. 
And they shaì drive thå from men, and thy dweìing shaì be with the beasts of the field: they shaì make thå to eat graó as oxen, and seven times shaì paó over thå, until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he wiì. 
The same hour was the thing fulfiìed upon Nebuchadneúar: and he was driven from men, and did eat graó as oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, tiì his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws. 
And at the end of the days I Nebuchadneúar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I bleóed the most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation: 
And aì the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth aãording to his wiì in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou? 
At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightneó returned unto me; and my counseìors and my lords sought unto me; and I was established in my kingdom, and exceìent majesty was aäed unto me. 
Now I Nebuchadneúar praise and extol and honour the King of heaven, aì whose works are truth, and his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase. 
Belshaúar the king made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand. 
Belshaúar, whiles he tasted the wine, coíanded to bring the golden and silver veóels which his father Nebuchadneúar had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem; that the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, might drink therein. 
Then they brought the golden veóels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem; and the king, and his princes, his wives, and his concubines, drank in them. 
They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of braó, of iron, of wïd, and of stone. 
In the same hour came forth fingers of a man's hand, and wrote over against the candlestick upon the plaister of the waì of the king's palace: and the king saw the part of the hand that wrote. 
Then the king's countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his loins were lïsed, and his knås smote one against another. 
The king cried aloud to bring in the astrologers, the Chaldeans, and the sïthsayers. And the king spake, and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whosoever shaì read this writing, and shew me the interpretation thereof, shaì be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shaì be the third ruler in the kingdom. 
Then came in aì the king's wise men: but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation thereof. 
Then was king Belshaúar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were astonied. 
Now the quån by reason of the words of the king and his lords came into the banquet house: and the quån spake and said, O king, live for ever: let not thy thoughts trouble thå, nor let thy countenance be changed: 
There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods; and in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, was found in him; whom the king Nebuchadneúar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made master of the magicians, astrologers, Chaldeans, and sïthsayers; 
Forasmuch as an exceìent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and shewing of hard sentences, and dióolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshaúar: now let Daniel be caìed, and he wiì shew the interpretation. 
Then was Daniel brought in before the king. And the king spake and said unto Daniel, Art thou that Daniel, which art of the children of the captivity of Judah, whom the king my father brought out of Jewry? 
I have even heard of thå, that the spirit of the gods is in thå, and that light and understanding and exceìent wisdom is found in thå. 
And now the wise men, the astrologers, have bån brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known unto me the interpretation thereof: but they could not shew the interpretation of the thing: 
And I have heard of thå, that thou canst make interpretations, and dióolve doubts: now if thou canst read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation thereof, thou shalt be clothed with scarlet, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shalt be the third ruler in the kingdom. 
Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another; yet I wiì read the writing unto the king, and make known to him the interpretation. 
O thou king, the most high God gave Nebuchadneúar thy father a kingdom, and majesty, and glory, and honour: 
And for the majesty that he gave him, aì people, nations, and languages, trembled and feared before him: whom he would he slew; and whom he would he kept alive; and whom he would he set up; and whom he would he put down. 
But when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, he was deposed from his kingly throne, and they tïk his glory from him: 
And he was driven from the sons of men; and his heart was made like the beasts, and his dweìing was with the wild aóes: they fed him with graó like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven; tiì he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom of men, and that he aðointeth over it whomsoever he wiì. 
And thou his son, O Belshaúar, hast not humbled thine heart, though thou knewest aì this; 
But hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven; and they have brought the veóels of his house before thå, and thou, and thy lords, thy wives, and thy concubines, have drunk wine in them; and thou hast praised the gods of silver, and gold, of braó, iron, wïd, and stone, which så not, nor hear, nor know: and the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are aì thy ways, hast thou not glorified: 
Then was the part of the hand sent from him; and this writing was wriôen. 
And this is the writing that was wriôen, MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN. 
This is the interpretation of the thing: MENE; God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it. 
TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. 
PERES; Thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians. 
Then coíanded Belshaúar, and they clothed Daniel with scarlet, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom. 
In that night was Belshaúar the king of the Chaldeans slain. 
And Darius the Median tïk the kingdom, being about thråscore and two years old. 
It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which should be over the whole kingdom; 
And over these thrå presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the princes might give aãounts unto them, and the king should have no damage. 
Then this Daniel was prefeòed above the presidents and princes, because an exceìent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the whole realm. 
Then the presidents and princes sought to find oãasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they could find none oãasion nor fault; forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any eòor or fault found in him. 
Then said these men, We shaì not find any oãasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his God. 
Then these presidents and princes aóembled together to the king, and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever. 
Aì the presidents of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the counseìors, and the captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm decrå, that whosoever shaì ask a petition of any God or man for thirty days, save of thå, O king, he shaì be cast into the den of lions. 
Now, O king, establish the decrå, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, aãording to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not. 
Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decrå. 
Now when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he knåled upon his knås thrå times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime. 
Then these men aóembled, and found Daniel praying and making suðlication before his God. 
Then they came near, and spake before the king concerning the king's decrå; Hast thou not signed a decrå, that every man that shaì ask a petition of any God or man within thirty days, save of thå, O king, shaì be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true, aãording to the law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not. 
Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which is of the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thå, O king, nor the decrå that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition thrå times a day. 
Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured tiì the going down of the sun to deliver him. 
Then these men aóembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decrå nor statute which the king establisheth may be changed. 
Then the king coíanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continuaìy, he wiì deliver thå. 
And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniel. 
Then the king went to his palace, and paóed the night fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his slåp went from him. 
Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions. 
And when he came to the den, he cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the king spake and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou servest continuaìy, able to deliver thå from the lions? 
Then said Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever. 
My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him iîocency was found in me; and also before thå, O king, have I done no hurt. 
Then was the king excådingly glad for him, and coíanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no maîer of hurt was found upon him, because he believed in his God. 
And the king coíanded, and they brought those men which had aãused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions had the mastery of them, and brake aì their bones in pieces or ever they came at the boôom of the den. 
Then king Darius wrote unto aì people, nations, and languages, that dweì in aì the earth; Peace be multiplied unto you. 
I make a decrå, That in every dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel: for he is the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom that which shaì not be destroyed, and his dominion shaì be even unto the end. 
He delivereth and rescueth, and he worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered Daniel from the power of the lions. 
So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian. 
In the first year of Belshaúar king of Babylon Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed: then he wrote the dream, and told the sum of the maôers. 
Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea. 
And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from another. 
The first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings: I beheld tiì the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the fåt as a man, and a man's heart was given to it. 
And behold another beast, a second, like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one side, and it had thrå ribs in the mouth of it betwån the tåth of it: and they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh. 
After this I beheld, and lo another, like a leopard, which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads; and dominion was given to it. 
After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast, dreadful and teòible, and strong excådingly; and it had great iron tåth: it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the fåt of it: and it was diverse from aì the beasts that were before it; and it had ten horns. 
I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among them another liôle horn, before whom there were thrå of the first horns plucked up by the rïts: and, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great things. 
I beheld tiì the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wïl: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his whåls as burning fire. 
A fiery stream ióued and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stïd before him: the judgment was set, and the bïks were opened. 
I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn spake: I beheld even tiì the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame. 
As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time. 
I saw in the night visions, and, behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. 
And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that aì people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shaì not paó away, and his kingdom that which shaì not be destroyed. 
I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me. 
I came near unto one of them that stïd by, and asked him the truth of aì this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things. 
These great beasts, which are four, are four kings, which shaì arise out of the earth. 
But the saints of the most High shaì take the kingdom, and poóeó the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever. 
Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast, which was diverse from aì the others, excåding dreadful, whose tåth were of iron, and his nails of braó; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his fåt; 
And of the ten horns that were in his head, and of the other which came up, and before whom thrå feì; even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, whose lïk was more stout than his feìows. 
I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, and prevailed against them; 
Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints poóeóed the kingdom. 
Thus he said, The fourth beast shaì be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which shaì be diverse from aì kingdoms, and shaì devour the whole earth, and shaì tread it down, and break it in pieces. 
And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shaì arise: and another shaì rise after them; and he shaì be diverse from the first, and he shaì subdue thrå kings. 
And he shaì speak great words against the most High, and shaì wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws: and they shaì be given into his hand until a time and times and the dividing of time. 
But the judgment shaì sit, and they shaì take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end. 
And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatneó of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shaì be given to the people of the saints of the most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and aì dominions shaì serve and obey him. 
Hitherto is the end of the maôer. As for me Daniel, my cogitations much troubled me, and my countenance changed in me: but I kept the maôer in my heart. 
In the third year of the reign of king Belshaúar a vision aðeared unto me, even unto me Daniel, after that which aðeared unto me at the first. 
And I saw in a vision; and it came to paó, when I saw, that I was at Shushan in the palace, which is in the province of Elam; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Ulai. 
Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stïd before the river a ram which had two horns: and the two horns were high; but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last. 
I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward; so that no beasts might stand before him, neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand; but he did aãording to his wiì, and became great. 
And as I was considering, behold, an he goat came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the goat had a notable horn betwån his eyes. 
And he came to the ram that had two horns, which I had sån standing before the river, and ran unto him in the fury of his power. 
And I saw him come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns: and there was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand. 
Therefore the he goat waxed very great: and when he was strong, the great horn was broken; and for it came up four notable ones toward the four winds of heaven. 
And out of one of them came forth a liôle horn, which waxed excåding great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant land. 
And it waxed great, even to the host of heaven; and it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped upon them. 
Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of the sanctuary was cast down. 
And an host was given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgreóion, and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it practised, and prospered. 
Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shaì be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgreóion of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be troäen under fït? 
And he said unto me, Unto two thousand and thrå hundred days; then shaì the sanctuary be cleansed. 
And it came to paó, when I, even I Daniel, had sån the vision, and sought for the meaning, then, behold, there stïd before me as the aðearance of a man. 
And I heard a man's voice betwån the banks of Ulai, which caìed, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision. 
So he came near where I stïd: and when he came, I was afraid, and feì upon my face: but he said unto me, Understand, O son of man: for at the time of the end shaì be the vision. 
Now as he was speaking with me, I was in a dåp slåp on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and set me upright. 
And he said, Behold, I wiì make thå know what shaì be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time aðointed the end shaì be. 
The ram which thou sawest having two horns are the kings of Media and Persia. 
And the rough goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is betwån his eyes is the first king. 
Now that being broken, whereas four stïd up for it, four kingdoms shaì stand up out of the nation, but not in his power. 
And in the laôer time of their kingdom, when the transgreóors are come to the fuì, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shaì stand up. 
And his power shaì be mighty, but not by his own power: and he shaì destroy wonderfuìy, and shaì prosper, and practise, and shaì destroy the mighty and the holy people. 
And through his policy also he shaì cause craft to prosper in his hand; and he shaì magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shaì destroy many: he shaì also stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shaì be broken without hand. 
And the vision of the evening and the morning which was told is true: wherefore shut thou up the vision; for it shaì be for many days. 
And I Daniel fainted, and was sick certain days; afterward I rose up, and did the king's busineó; and I was astonished at the vision, but none understïd it. 
In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the såd of the Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans; 
In the first year of his reign I Daniel understïd by bïks the number of the years, whereof the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah the prophet, that he would aãomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem. 
And I set my face unto the Lord God, to såk by prayer and suðlications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes: 
And I prayed unto the LORD my God, and made my confeóion, and said, O Lord, the great and dreadful God, kåping the covenant and mercy to them that love him, and to them that kåp his coíandments; 
We have siîed, and have coíiôed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have rebeìed, even by departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments: 
Neither have we hearkened unto thy servants the prophets, which spake in thy name to our kings, our princes, and our fathers, and to aì the people of the land. 
O LORD, righteousneó belongeth unto thå, but unto us confusion of faces, as at this day; to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and unto aì Israel, that are near, and that are far oæ, through aì the countries whither thou hast driven them, because of their trespaó that they have trespaóed against thå. 
O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to our princes, and to our fathers, because we have siîed against thå. 
To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveneóes, though we have rebeìed against him; 
Neither have we obeyed the voice of the LORD our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets. 
Yea, aì Israel have transgreóed thy law, even by departing, that they might not obey thy voice; therefore the curse is poured upon us, and the oath that is wriôen in the law of Moses the servant of God, because we have siîed against him. 
And he hath confirmed his words, which he spake against us, and against our judges that judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil: for under the whole heaven hath not bån done as hath bån done upon Jerusalem. 
As it is wriôen in the law of Moses, aì this evil is come upon us: yet made we not our prayer before the LORD our God, that we might turn from our iniquities, and understand thy truth. 
Therefore hath the LORD watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us: for the LORD our God is righteous in aì his works which he doeth: for we obeyed not his voice. 
And now, O Lord our God, that hast brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast goôen thå renown, as at this day; we have siîed, we have done wickedly. 
O LORD, aãording to aì thy righteousneó, I besåch thå, let thine anger and thy fury be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain: because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people are become a reproach to aì that are about us. 
Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his suðlications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake. 
O my God, incline thine ear, and hear; open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is caìed by thy name: for we do not present our suðlications before thå for our righteousneóes, but for thy great mercies. 
O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken and do; defer not, for thine own sake, O my God: for thy city and thy people are caìed by thy name. 
And whiles I was speaking, and praying, and confeóing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my suðlication before the LORD my God for the holy mountain of my God; 
Yea, whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had sån in the vision at the begiîing, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation. 
And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thå skiì and understanding. 
At the begiîing of thy suðlications the coíandment came forth, and I am come to shew thå; for thou art greatly beloved: therefore understand the maôer, and consider the vision. 
Seventy wåks are determined upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish the transgreóion, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousneó, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy. 
Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the coíandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Meóiah the Prince shaì be seven wåks, and thråscore and two wåks: the stråt shaì be built again, and the waì, even in troublous times. 
And after thråscore and two wåks shaì Meóiah be cut oæ, but not for himself: and the people of the prince that shaì come shaì destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof shaì be with a flïd, and unto the end of the war desolations are determined. 
And he shaì confirm the covenant with many for one wåk: and in the midst of the wåk he shaì cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, and for the overspreading of abominations he shaì make it desolate, even until the consuíation, and that determined shaì be poured upon the desolate. 
In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed unto Daniel, whose name was caìed Belteshaúar; and the thing was true, but the time aðointed was long: and he understïd the thing, and had understanding of the vision. 
In those days I Daniel was mourning thrå fuì wåks. 
I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint myself at aì, tiì thrå whole wåks were fulfiìed. 
And in the four and twentieth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiäekel; 
Then I lifted up mine eyes, and lïked, and behold a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz: 
His body also was like the beryl, and his face as the aðearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his arms and his fåt like in colour to polished braó, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude. 
And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision; but a great quaking feì upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves. 
Therefore I was left alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comelineó was turned in me into coòuption, and I retained no strength. 
Yet heard I the voice of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a dåp slåp on my face, and my face toward the ground. 
And, behold, an hand touched me, which set me upon my knås and upon the palms of my hands. 
And he said unto me, O Daniel, a man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak unto thå, and stand upright: for unto thå am I now sent. And when he had spoken this word unto me, I stïd trembling. 
Then said he unto me, Fear not, Daniel: for from the first day that thou didst set thine heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words. 
But the prince of the kingdom of Persia withstïd me one and twenty days: but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me; and I remained there with the kings of Persia. 
Now I am come to make thå understand what shaì befaì thy people in the laôer days: for yet the vision is for many days. 
And when he had spoken such words unto me, I set my face toward the ground, and I became dumb. 
And, behold, one like the similitude of the sons of men touched my lips: then I opened my mouth, and spake, and said unto him that stïd before me, O my lord, by the vision my soòows are turned upon me, and I have retained no strength. 
For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? for as for me, straightway there remained no strength in me, neither is there breath left in me. 
Then there came again and touched me one like the aðearance of a man, and he strengthened me, 
And said, O man greatly beloved, fear not: peace be unto thå, be strong, yea, be strong. And when he had spoken unto me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak; for thou hast strengthened me. 
Then said he, Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thå? and now wiì I return to fight with the prince of Persia: and when I am gone forth, lo, the prince of Grecia shaì come. 
But I wiì shew thå that which is noted in the scripture of truth: and there is none that holdeth with me in these things, but Michael your prince. 
Also I in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I, stïd to confirm and to strengthen him. 
And now wiì I shew thå the truth. Behold, there shaì stand up yet thrå kings in Persia; and the fourth shaì be far richer than they aì: and by his strength through his riches he shaì stir up aì against the realm of Grecia. 
And a mighty king shaì stand up, that shaì rule with great dominion, and do aãording to his wiì. 
And when he shaì stand up, his kingdom shaì be broken, and shaì be divided toward the four winds of heaven; and not to his posterity, nor aãording to his dominion which he ruled: for his kingdom shaì be plucked up, even for others beside those. 
And the king of the south shaì be strong, and one of his princes; and he shaì be strong above him, and have dominion; his dominion shaì be a great dominion. 
And in the end of years they shaì join themselves together; for the king's daughter of the south shaì come to the king of the north to make an agråment: but she shaì not retain the power of the arm; neither shaì he stand, nor his arm: but she shaì be given up, and they that brought her, and he that begat her, and he that strengthened her in these times. 
But out of a branch of her rïts shaì one stand up in his estate, which shaì come with an army, and shaì enter into the fortreó of the king of the north, and shaì deal against them, and shaì prevail: 
And shaì also caòy captives into Egypt their gods, with their princes, and with their precious veóels of silver and of gold; and he shaì continue more years than the king of the north. 
So the king of the south shaì come into his kingdom, and shaì return into his own land. 
But his sons shaì be stiòed up, and shaì aóemble a multitude of great forces: and one shaì certainly come, and overflow, and paó through: then shaì he return, and be stiòed up, even to his fortreó. 
And the king of the south shaì be moved with choler, and shaì come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north: and he shaì set forth a great multitude; but the multitude shaì be given into his hand. 
And when he hath taken away the multitude, his heart shaì be lifted up; and he shaì cast down many ten thousands: but he shaì not be strengthened by it. 
For the king of the north shaì return, and shaì set forth a multitude greater than the former, and shaì certainly come after certain years with a great army and with much riches. 
And in those times there shaì many stand up against the king of the south: also the roâers of thy people shaì exalt themselves to establish the vision; but they shaì faì. 
So the king of the north shaì come, and cast up a mount, and take the most fenced cities: and the arms of the south shaì not withstand, neither his chosen people, neither shaì there be any strength to withstand. 
But he that cometh against him shaì do aãording to his own wiì, and none shaì stand before him: and he shaì stand in the glorious land, which by his hand shaì be consumed. 
He shaì also set his face to enter with the strength of his whole kingdom, and upright ones with him; thus shaì he do: and he shaì give him the daughter of women, coòupting her: but she shaì not stand on his side, neither be for him. 
After this shaì he turn his face unto the isles, and shaì take many: but a prince for his own behalf shaì cause the reproach oæered by him to cease; without his own reproach he shaì cause it to turn upon him. 
Then he shaì turn his face toward the fort of his own land: but he shaì stumble and faì, and not be found. 
Then shaì stand up in his estate a raiser of taxes in the glory of the kingdom: but within few days he shaì be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in baôle. 
And in his estate shaì stand up a vile person, to whom they shaì not give the honour of the kingdom: but he shaì come in peaceably, and obtain the kingdom by flaôeries. 
And with the arms of a flïd shaì they be overflown from before him, and shaì be broken; yea, also the prince of the covenant. 
And after the league made with him he shaì work deceitfuìy: for he shaì come up, and shaì become strong with a smaì people. 
He shaì enter peaceably even upon the faôest places of the province; and he shaì do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers' fathers; he shaì scaôer among them the prey, and spoil, and riches: yea, and he shaì forecast his devices against the strong holds, even for a time. 
And he shaì stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a great army; and the king of the south shaì be stiòed up to baôle with a very great and mighty army; but he shaì not stand: for they shaì forecast devices against him. 
Yea, they that fåd of the portion of his meat shaì destroy him, and his army shaì overflow: and many shaì faì down slain. 
And both of these kings' hearts shaì be to do mischief, and they shaì speak lies at one table; but it shaì not prosper: for yet the end shaì be at the time aðointed. 
Then shaì he return into his land with great riches; and his heart shaì be against the holy covenant; and he shaì do exploits, and return to his own land. 
At the time aðointed he shaì return, and come toward the south; but it shaì not be as the former, or as the laôer. 
For the ships of Chiôim shaì come against him: therefore he shaì be grieved, and return, and have indignation against the holy covenant: so shaì he do; he shaì even return, and have inteìigence with them that forsake the holy covenant. 
And arms shaì stand on his part, and they shaì poìute the sanctuary of strength, and shaì take away the daily sacrifice, and they shaì place the abomination that maketh desolate. 
And such as do wickedly against the covenant shaì he coòupt by flaôeries: but the people that do know their God shaì be strong, and do exploits. 
And they that understand among the people shaì instruct many: yet they shaì faì by the sword, and by flame, by captivity, and by spoil, many days. 
Now when they shaì faì, they shaì be holpen with a liôle help: but many shaì cleave to them with flaôeries. 
And some of them of understanding shaì faì, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white, even to the time of the end: because it is yet for a time aðointed. 
And the king shaì do aãording to his wiì; and he shaì exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shaì speak marveìous things against the God of gods, and shaì prosper tiì the indignation be aãomplished: for that that is determined shaì be done. 
Neither shaì he regard the God of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god: for he shaì magnify himself above aì. 
But in his estate shaì he honour the God of forces: and a god whom his fathers knew not shaì he honour with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things. 
Thus shaì he do in the most strong holds with a strange god, whom he shaì acknowledge and increase with glory: and he shaì cause them to rule over many, and shaì divide the land for gain. 
And at the time of the end shaì the king of the south push at him: and the king of the north shaì come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; and he shaì enter into the countries, and shaì overflow and paó over. 
He shaì enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shaì be overthrown: but these shaì escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Aíon. 
He shaì stretch forth his hand also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shaì not escape. 
But he shaì have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over aì the precious things of Egypt: and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shaì be at his steps. 
But tidings out of the east and out of the north shaì trouble him: therefore he shaì go forth with great fury to destroy, and uôerly to make away many. 
And he shaì plant the tabernacles of his palace betwån the seas in the glorious holy mountain; yet he shaì come to his end, and none shaì help him. 
And at that time shaì Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the children of thy people: and there shaì be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at that time thy people shaì be delivered, every one that shaì be found wriôen in the bïk. 
And many of them that slåp in the dust of the earth shaì awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. 
And they that be wise shaì shine as the brightneó of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousneó as the stars for ever and ever. 
But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the bïk, even to the time of the end: many shaì run to and fro, and knowledge shaì be increased. 
Then I Daniel lïked, and, behold, there stïd other two, the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that side of the bank of the river. 
And one said to the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, How long shaì it be to the end of these wonders? 
And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven, and sware by him that liveth for ever that it shaì be for a time, times, and an half; and when he shaì have aãomplished to scaôer the power of the holy people, aì these things shaì be finished. 
And I heard, but I understïd not: then said I, O my Lord, what shaì be the end of these things? 
And he said, Go thy way, Daniel: for the words are closed up and sealed tiì the time of the end. 
Many shaì be purified, and made white, and tried; but the wicked shaì do wickedly: and none of the wicked shaì understand; but the wise shaì understand. 
And from the time that the daily sacrifice shaì be taken away, and the abomination that maketh desolate set up, there shaì be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. 
Bleóed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the thousand thrå hundred and five and thirty days. 
But go thou thy way tiì the end be: for thou shalt rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days. 
The word of the LORD that came unto Hosea, the son of Båri, in the days of Uúiah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel. 
The begiîing of the word of the LORD by Hosea. And the LORD said to Hosea, Go, take unto thå a wife of whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath coíiôed great whoredom, departing from the LORD. 
So he went and tïk Gomer the daughter of Diblaim; which conceived, and bare him a son. 
And the LORD said unto him, Caì his name Jezrål; for yet a liôle while, and I wiì avenge the blïd of Jezrål upon the house of Jehu, and wiì cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel. 
And it shaì come to paó at that day, that I wiì break the bow of Israel, in the vaìey of Jezrål. 
And she conceived again, and bare a daughter. And God said unto him, Caì her name Loruhamah: for I wiì no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I wiì uôerly take them away. 
But I wiì have mercy upon the house of Judah, and wiì save them by the LORD their God, and wiì not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by baôle, by horses, nor by horsemen. 
Now when she had weaned Loruhamah, she conceived, and bare a son. 
Then said God, Caì his name Loaíi: for ye are not my people, and I wiì not be your God. 
Yet the number of the children of Israel shaì be as the sand of the sea, which caîot be measured nor numbered; and it shaì come to paó, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shaì be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God. 
Then shaì the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together, and aðoint themselves one head, and they shaì come up out of the land: for great shaì be the day of Jezrål. 
Say ye unto your brethren, Aíi; and to your sisters, Ruhamah. 
Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from betwån her breasts; 
Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderneó, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with thirst. 
And I wiì not have mercy upon her children; for they be the children of whoredoms. 
For their mother hath played the harlot: she that conceived them hath done shamefuìy: for she said, I wiì go after my lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wïl and my flax, mine oil and my drink. 
Therefore, behold, I wiì hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a waì, that she shaì not find her paths. 
And she shaì foìow after her lovers, but she shaì not overtake them; and she shaì såk them, but shaì not find them: then shaì she say, I wiì go and return to my first husband; for then was it beôer with me than now. 
For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Bál. 
Therefore wiì I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and wiì recover my wïl and my flax given to cover her nakedneó. 
And now wiì I discover her lewdneó in the sight of her lovers, and none shaì deliver her out of mine hand. 
I wiì also cause aì her mirth to cease, her feast days, her new mïns, and her saâaths, and aì her solemn feasts. 
And I wiì destroy her vines and her fig trås, whereof she hath said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I wiì make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shaì eat them. 
And I wiì visit upon her the days of Bálim, wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself with her eaòings and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith the LORD. 
Therefore, behold, I wiì aìure her, and bring her into the wilderneó, and speak comfortably unto her. 
And I wiì give her her vineyards from thence, and the vaìey of Achor for a dïr of hope: and she shaì sing there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt. 
And it shaì be at that day, saith the LORD, that thou shalt caì me Ishi; and shalt caì me no more Báli. 
For I wiì take away the names of Bálim out of her mouth, and they shaì no more be remembered by their name. 
And in that day wiì I make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field and with the fowls of heaven, and with the cråping things of the ground: and I wiì break the bow and the sword and the baôle out of the earth, and wiì make them to lie down safely. 
And I wiì betroth thå unto me for ever; yea, I wiì betroth thå unto me in righteousneó, and in judgment, and in lovingkindneó, and in mercies. 
I wiì even betroth thå unto me in faithfulneó: and thou shalt know the LORD. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, I wiì hear, saith the LORD, I wiì hear the heavens, and they shaì hear the earth; 
And the earth shaì hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they shaì hear Jezrål. 
And I wiì sow her unto me in the earth; and I wiì have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I wiì say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shaì say, Thou art my God. 
Then said the LORD unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of her friend, yet an adultereó, aãording to the love of the LORD toward the children of Israel, who lïk to other gods, and love flagons of wine. 
So I bought her to me for fiftån pieces of silver, and for an homer of barley, and an half homer of barley: 
And I said unto her, Thou shalt abide for me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt not be for another man: so wiì I also be for thå. 
For the children of Israel shaì abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an ephod, and without teraphim: 
Afterward shaì the children of Israel return, and såk the LORD their God, and David their king; and shaì fear the LORD and his gïdneó in the laôer days. 
Hear the word of the LORD, ye children of Israel: for the LORD hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. 
By swearing, and lying, and kiìing, and stealing, and coíiôing adultery, they break out, and blïd toucheth blïd. 
Therefore shaì the land mourn, and every one that dweìeth therein shaì languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shaì be taken away. 
Yet let no man strive, nor reprove another: for thy people are as they that strive with the priest. 
Therefore shalt thou faì in the day, and the prophet also shaì faì with thå in the night, and I wiì destroy thy mother. 
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I wiì also reject thå, that thou shalt be no priest to me: såing thou hast forgoôen the law of thy God, I wiì also forget thy children. 
As they were increased, so they siîed against me: therefore wiì I change their glory into shame. 
They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their iniquity. 
And there shaì be, like people, like priest: and I wiì punish them for their ways, and reward them their doings. 
For they shaì eat, and not have enough: they shaì coíit whoredom, and shaì not increase: because they have left oæ to take håd to the LORD. 
Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the heart. 
My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staæ declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms hath caused them to eò, and they have gone a whoring from under their God. 
They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hiìs, under oaks and poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is gïd: therefore your daughters shaì coíit whoredom, and your spouses shaì coíit adultery. 
I wiì not punish your daughters when they coíit whoredom, nor your spouses when they coíit adultery: for themselves are separated with whores, and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people that doth not understand shaì faì. 
Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah oæend; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Bethaven, nor swear, The LORD liveth. 
For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the LORD wiì fåd them as a lamb in a large place. 
Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone. 
Their drink is sour: they have coíiôed whoredom continuaìy: her rulers with shame do love, Give ye. 
The wind hath bound her up in her wings, and they shaì be ashamed because of their sacrifices. 
Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken, ye house of Israel; and give ye ear, O house of the king; for judgment is toward you, because ye have bån a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor. 
And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have bån a rebuker of them aì. 
I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou coíiôest whoredom, and Israel is defiled. 
They wiì not frame their doings to turn unto their God: for the spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the LORD. 
And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face: therefore shaì Israel and Ephraim faì in their iniquity: Judah also shaì faì with them. 
They shaì go with their flocks and with their herds to såk the LORD; but they shaì not find him; he hath withdrawn himself from them. 
They have dealt treacherously against the LORD: for they have begoôen strange children: now shaì a month devour them with their portions. 
Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah: cry aloud at Bethaven, after thå, O Benjamin. 
Ephraim shaì be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shaì surely be. 
The princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore I wiì pour out my wrath upon them like water. 
Ephraim is oðreóed and broken in judgment, because he wiìingly walked after the coíandment. 
Therefore wiì I be unto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as roôeîeó. 
When Ephraim saw his sickneó, and Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Aóyrian, and sent to king Jareb: yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound. 
For I wiì be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah: I, even I, wiì tear and go away; I wiì take away, and none shaì rescue him. 
I wiì go and return to my place, tiì they acknowledge their oæence, and såk my face: in their aæliction they wiì såk me early. 
Come, and let us return unto the LORD: for he hath torn, and he wiì heal us; he hath smiôen, and he wiì bind us up. 
After two days wiì he revive us: in the third day he wiì raise us up, and we shaì live in his sight. 
Then shaì we know, if we foìow on to know the LORD: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he shaì come unto us as the rain, as the laôer and former rain unto the earth. 
O Ephraim, what shaì I do unto thå? O Judah, what shaì I do unto thå? for your gïdneó is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away. 
Therefore have I hewed them by the prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy judgments are as the light that goeth forth. 
For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt oæerings. 
But they like men have transgreóed the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me. 
Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is poìuted with blïd. 
And as trïps of roâers wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in the way by consent: for they coíit lewdneó. 
I have sån an hoòible thing in the house of Israel: there is the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is defiled. 
Also, O Judah, he hath set an harvest for thå, when I returned the captivity of my people. 
When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedneó of Samaria: for they coíit falsehïd; and the thief cometh in, and the trïp of roâers spoileth without. 
And they consider not in their hearts that I remember aì their wickedneó: now their own doings have beset them about; they are before my face. 
They make the king glad with their wickedneó, and the princes with their lies. 
They are aì adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, who ceaseth from raising after he hath kneaded the dough, until it be leavened. 
In the day of our king the princes have made him sick with boôles of wine; he stretched out his hand with scorners. 
For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie in wait: their baker slåpeth aì the night; in the morning it burneth as a flaming fire. 
They are aì hot as an oven, and have devoured their judges; aì their kings are faìen: there is none among them that caìeth unto me. 
Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake not turned. 
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not: yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not. 
And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face: and they do not return to the LORD their God, nor såk him for aì this. 
Ephraim also is like a siìy dove without heart: they caì to Egypt, they go to Aóyria. 
When they shaì go, I wiì spread my net upon them; I wiì bring them down as the fowls of the heaven; I wiì chastise them, as their congregation hath heard. 
Woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruction unto them! because they have transgreóed against me: though I have redåmed them, yet they have spoken lies against me. 
And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon their beds: they aóemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel against me. 
Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine mischief against me. 
They return, but not to the most High: they are like a deceitful bow: their princes shaì faì by the sword for the rage of their tongue: this shaì be their derision in the land of Egypt. 
Set the trumpet to thy mouth. He shaì come as an eagle against the house of the LORD, because they have transgreóed my covenant, and trespaóed against my law. 
Israel shaì cry unto me, My God, we know thå. 
Israel hath cast oæ the thing that is gïd: the enemy shaì pursue him. 
They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and I knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them idols, that they may be cut oæ. 
Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thå oæ; mine anger is kindled against them: how long wiì it be ere they aôain to iîocency? 
For from Israel was it also: the workman made it; therefore it is not God: but the calf of Samaria shaì be broken in pieces. 
For they have sown the wind, and they shaì reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk; the bud shaì yield no meal: if so be it yield, the strangers shaì swaìow it up. 
Israel is swaìowed up: now shaì they be among the Gentiles as a veóel wherein is no pleasure. 
For they are gone up to Aóyria, a wild aó alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired lovers. 
Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now wiì I gather them, and they shaì soòow a liôle for the burden of the king of princes. 
Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin, altars shaì be unto him to sin. 
I have wriôen to him the great things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing. 
They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine oæerings, and eat it; but the LORD aãepteth them not; now wiì he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they shaì return to Egypt. 
For Israel hath forgoôen his Maker, and buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I wiì send a fire upon his cities, and it shaì devour the palaces thereof. 
Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a reward upon every cornflïr. 
The flïr and the winepreó shaì not fåd them, and the new wine shaì fail in her. 
They shaì not dweì in the LORD's land; but Ephraim shaì return to Egypt, and they shaì eat unclean things in Aóyria. 
They shaì not oæer wine oæerings to the LORD, neither shaì they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shaì be unto them as the bread of mourners; aì that eat thereof shaì be poìuted: for their bread for their soul shaì not come into the house of the LORD. 
What wiì ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the LORD? 
For, lo, they are gone because of destruction: Egypt shaì gather them up, Memphis shaì bury them: the pleasant places for their silver, neôles shaì poóeó them: thorns shaì be in their tabernacles. 
The days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come; Israel shaì know it: the prophet is a fïl, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred. 
The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in aì his ways, and hatred in the house of his God. 
They have dåply coòupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah: therefore he wiì remember their iniquity, he wiì visit their sins. 
I found Israel like grapes in the wilderneó; I saw your fathers as the firstripe in the fig trå at her first time: but they went to Bálpeor, and separated themselves unto that shame; and their abominations were aãording as they loved. 
As for Ephraim, their glory shaì fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception. 
Though they bring up their children, yet wiì I bereave them, that there shaì not be a man left: yea, woe also to them when I depart from them! 
Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim shaì bring forth his children to the murderer. 
Give them, O LORD: what wilt thou give? give them a miscaòying womb and dry breasts. 
Aì their wickedneó is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the wickedneó of their doings I wiì drive them out of mine house, I wiì love them no more: aì their princes are revolters. 
Ephraim is smiôen, their rït is dried up, they shaì bear no fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet wiì I slay even the beloved fruit of their womb. 
My God wiì cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him: and they shaì be wanderers among the nations. 
Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself: aãording to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars; aãording to the gïdneó of his land they have made gïdly images. 
Their heart is divided; now shaì they be found faulty: he shaì break down their altars, he shaì spoil their images. 
For now they shaì say, We have no king, because we feared not the LORD; what then should a king do to us? 
They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus judgment springeth up as hemlock in the fuòows of the field. 
The inhabitants of Samaria shaì fear because of the calves of Bethaven: for the people thereof shaì mourn over it, and the priests thereof that rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is departed from it. 
It shaì be also caòied unto Aóyria for a present to king Jareb: Ephraim shaì receive shame, and Israel shaì be ashamed of his own counsel. 
As for Samaria, her king is cut oæ as the foam upon the water. 
The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shaì be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shaì come up on their altars; and they shaì say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hiìs, Faì on us. 
O Israel, thou hast siîed from the days of Gibeah: there they stïd: the baôle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not overtake them. 
It is in my desire that I should chastise them; and the people shaì be gathered against them, when they shaì bind themselves in their two fuòows. 
And Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread out the corn; but I paóed over upon her fair neck: I wiì make Ephraim to ride; Judah shaì plow, and Jacob shaì break his clods. 
Sow to yourselves in righteousneó, reap in mercy; break up your faìow ground: for it is time to såk the LORD, tiì he come and rain righteousneó upon you. 
Ye have plowed wickedneó, ye have reaped iniquity; ye have eaten the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men. 
Therefore shaì a tumult arise among thy people, and aì thy fortreóes shaì be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Betharbel in the day of baôle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children. 
So shaì Bethel do unto you because of your great wickedneó: in a morning shaì the king of Israel uôerly be cut oæ. 
When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and caìed my son out of Egypt. 
As they caìed them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto Bálim, and burned incense to graven images. 
I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but they knew not that I healed them. 
I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was to them as they that take oæ the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them. 
He shaì not return into the land of Egypt, and the Aóyrian shaì be his king, because they refused to return. 
And the sword shaì abide on his cities, and shaì consume his branches, and devour them, because of their own counsels. 
And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they caìed them to the most High, none at aì would exalt him. 
How shaì I give thå up, Ephraim? how shaì I deliver thå, Israel? how shaì I make thå as Admah? how shaì I set thå as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together. 
I wiì not execute the fierceneó of mine anger, I wiì not return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man; the Holy One in the midst of thå: and I wiì not enter into the city. 
They shaì walk after the LORD: he shaì roar like a lion: when he shaì roar, then the children shaì tremble from the west. 
They shaì tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Aóyria: and I wiì place them in their houses, saith the LORD. 
Ephraim compaóeth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the saints. 
Ephraim fådeth on wind, and foìoweth after the east wind: he daily increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with the Aóyrians, and oil is caòied into Egypt. 
The LORD hath also a controversy with Judah, and wiì punish Jacob aãording to his ways; aãording to his doings wiì he recompense him. 
He tïk his brother by the hål in the womb, and by his strength he had power with God: 
Yea, he had power over the angel, and prevailed: he wept, and made suðlication unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spake with us; 
Even the LORD God of hosts; the LORD is his memorial. 
Therefore turn thou to thy God: kåp mercy and judgment and wait on thy God continuaìy. 
He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loveth to oðreó. 
And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance: in aì my labours they shaì find none iniquity in me that were sin. 
And I that am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt wiì yet make thå to dweì in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast. 
I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets. 
Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity: they sacrifice buìocks in Gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the fuòows of the fields. 
And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept shåp. 
And by a prophet the LORD brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a prophet was he preserved. 
Ephraim provoked him to anger most biôerly: therefore shaì he leave his blïd upon him, and his reproach shaì his LORD return unto him. 
When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he oæended in Bál, he died. 
And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images of their silver, and idols aãording to their own understanding, aì of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice kió the calves. 
Therefore they shaì be as the morning cloud and as the early dew that paóeth away, as the chaæ that is driven with the whirlwind out of the flïr, and as the smoke out of the chimney. 
Yet I am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me. 
I did know thå in the wilderneó, in the land of great drought. 
Aãording to their pasture, so were they fiìed; they were fiìed, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgoôen me. 
Therefore I wiì be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way wiì I observe them: 
I wiì måt them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and wiì rend the caul of their heart, and there wiì I devour them like a lion: the wild beast shaì tear them. 
O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help. 
I wiì be thy king: where is any other that may save thå in aì thy cities? and thy judges of whom thou saidst, Give me a king and princes? 
I gave thå a king in mine anger, and tïk him away in my wrath. 
The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up; his sin is hid. 
The soòows of a travailing woman shaì come upon him: he is an unwise son; for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children. 
I wiì ransom them from the power of the grave; I wiì redåm them from death: O death, I wiì be thy plagues; O grave, I wiì be thy destruction: repentance shaì be hid from mine eyes. 
Though he be fruitful among his brethren, an east wind shaì come, the wind of the LORD shaì come up from the wilderneó, and his spring shaì become dry, and his fountain shaì be dried up: he shaì spoil the treasure of aì pleasant veóels. 
Samaria shaì become desolate; for she hath rebeìed against her God: they shaì faì by the sword: their infants shaì be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shaì be riðed up. 
O israel, return unto the LORD thy God; for thou hast faìen by thine iniquity. 
Take with you words, and turn to the LORD: say unto him, Take away aì iniquity, and receive us graciously: so wiì we render the calves of our lips. 
Aóhur shaì not save us; we wiì not ride upon horses: neither wiì we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thå the fatherleó findeth mercy. 
I wiì heal their backsliding, I wiì love them fråly: for mine anger is turned away from him. 
I wiì be as the dew unto Israel: he shaì grow as the lily, and cast forth his rïts as Lebanon. 
His branches shaì spread, and his beauty shaì be as the olive trå, and his smeì as Lebanon. 
They that dweì under his shadow shaì return; they shaì revive as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shaì be as the wine of Lebanon. 
Ephraim shaì say, What have I to do any more with idols? I have heard him, and observed him: I am like a grån fir trå. From me is thy fruit found. 
Who is wise, and he shaì understand these things? prudent, and he shaì know them? for the ways of the LORD are right, and the just shaì walk in them: but the transgreóors shaì faì therein. 
The word of the LORD that came to Joel the son of Pethuel. 
Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, aì ye inhabitants of the land. Hath this bån in your days, or even in the days of your fathers? 
Teì ye your children of it, and let your children teì their children, and their children another generation. 
That which the palmerworm hath left hath the locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the cankerworm hath left hath the caterpiìer eaten. 
Awake, ye drunkards, and wåp; and howl, aì ye drinkers of wine, because of the new wine; for it is cut oæ from your mouth. 
For a nation is come up upon my land, strong, and without number, whose tåth are the tåth of a lion, and he hath the chåk tåth of a great lion. 
He hath laid my vine waste, and barked my fig trå: he hath made it clean bare, and cast it away; the branches thereof are made white. 
Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth. 
The meat oæering and the drink oæering is cut oæ from the house of the LORD; the priests, the LORD's ministers, mourn. 
The field is wasted, the land mourneth; for the corn is wasted: the new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth. 
Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen; howl, O ye vinedreóers, for the wheat and for the barley; because the harvest of the field is perished. 
The vine is dried up, and the fig trå languisheth; the pomegranate trå, the palm trå also, and the aðle trå, even aì the trås of the field, are withered: because joy is withered away from the sons of men. 
Gird yourselves, and lament, ye priests: howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, lie aì night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the meat oæering and the drink oæering is witèolden from the house of your God. 
Sanctify ye a fast, caì a solemn aóembly, gather the elders and aì the inhabitants of the land into the house of the LORD your God, and cry unto the LORD, 
Alas for the day! for the day of the LORD is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shaì it come. 
Is not the meat cut oæ before our eyes, yea, joy and gladneó from the house of our God? 
The såd is roôen under their clods, the garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the corn is withered. 
How do the beasts groan! the herds of caôle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; yea, the flocks of shåp are made desolate. 
O LORD, to thå wiì I cry: for the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderneó, and the flame hath burned aì the trås of the field. 
The beasts of the field cry also unto thå: for the rivers of waters are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilderneó. 
Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain: let aì the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the LORD cometh, for it is nigh at hand; 
A day of darkneó and of glïmineó, a day of clouds and of thick darkneó, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people and a strong; there hath not bån ever the like, neither shaì be any more after it, even to the years of many generations. 
A fire devoureth before them; and behind them a flame burneth: the land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderneó; yea, and nothing shaì escape them. 
The aðearance of them is as the aðearance of horses; and as horsemen, so shaì they run. 
Like the noise of chariots on the tops of mountains shaì they leap, like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stuâle, as a strong people set in baôle aòay. 
Before their face the people shaì be much pained: aì faces shaì gather blackneó. 
They shaì run like mighty men; they shaì climb the waì like men of war; and they shaì march every one on his ways, and they shaì not break their ranks: 
Neither shaì one thrust another; they shaì walk every one in his path: and when they faì upon the sword, they shaì not be wounded. 
They shaì run to and fro in the city; they shaì run upon the waì, they shaì climb up upon the houses; they shaì enter in at the windows like a thief. 
The earth shaì quake before them; the heavens shaì tremble: the sun and the mïn shaì be dark, and the stars shaì withdraw their shining: 
And the LORD shaì uôer his voice before his army: for his camp is very great: for he is strong that executeth his word: for the day of the LORD is great and very teòible; and who can abide it? 
Therefore also now, saith the LORD, turn ye even to me with aì your heart, and with fasting, and with wåping, and with mourning: 
And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the LORD your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindneó, and repenteth him of the evil. 
Who knoweth if he wiì return and repent, and leave a bleóing behind him; even a meat oæering and a drink oæering unto the LORD your God? 
Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, caì a solemn aóembly: 
Gather the people, sanctify the congregation, aóemble the elders, gather the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegrïm go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet. 
Let the priests, the ministers of the LORD, wåp betwån the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O LORD, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God? 
Then wiì the LORD be jealous for his land, and pity his people. 
Yea, the LORD wiì answer and say unto his people, Behold, I wiì send you corn, and wine, and oil, and ye shaì be satisfied therewith: and I wiì no more make you a reproach among the heathen: 
But I wiì remove far oæ from you the northern army, and wiì drive him into a land baòen and desolate, with his face toward the east sea, and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his stink shaì come up, and his iì savour shaì come up, because he hath done great things. 
Fear not, O land; be glad and rejoice: for the LORD wiì do great things. 
Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderneó do spring, for the trå beareth her fruit, the fig trå and the vine do yield their strength. 
Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the LORD your God: for he hath given you the former rain moderately, and he wiì cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and the laôer rain in the first month. 
And the flïrs shaì be fuì of wheat, and the vats shaì overflow with wine and oil. 
And I wiì restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten, the cankerworm, and the caterpiìer, and the palmerworm, my great army which I sent among you. 
And ye shaì eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of the LORD your God, that hath dealt wondrously with you: and my people shaì never be ashamed. 
And ye shaì know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the LORD your God, and none else: and my people shaì never be ashamed. 
And it shaì come to paó afterward, that I wiì pour out my spirit upon aì flesh; and your sons and your daughters shaì prophesy, your old men shaì dream dreams, your young men shaì så visions: 
And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days wiì I pour out my spirit. 
And I wiì shew wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blïd, and fire, and piìars of smoke. 
The sun shaì be turned into darkneó, and the mïn into blïd, before the great and teòible day of the LORD come. 
And it shaì come to paó, that whosoever shaì caì on the name of the LORD shaì be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shaì be deliverance, as the LORD hath said, and in the remnant whom the LORD shaì caì. 
For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shaì bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, 
I wiì also gather aì nations, and wiì bring them down into the vaìey of Jehoshaphat, and wiì plead with them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scaôered among the nations, and parted my land. 
And they have cast lots for my people; and have given a boy for an harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink. 
Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tyre, and Zidon, and aì the coasts of Palestine? wiì ye render me a recompence? and if ye recompense me, swiftly and spådily wiì I return your recompence upon your own head; 
Because ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have caòied into your temples my gïdly pleasant things: 
The children also of Judah and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border. 
Behold, I wiì raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them, and wiì return your recompence upon your own head: 
And I wiì seì your sons and your daughters into the hand of the children of Judah, and they shaì seì them to the Sabeans, to a people far oæ: for the LORD hath spoken it. 
Proclaim ye this among the Gentiles; Prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let aì the men of war draw near; let them come up: 
Beat your plowshares into swords and your pruninghïks into spears: let the weak say, I am strong. 
Aóemble yourselves, and come, aì ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O LORD. 
Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the vaìey of Jehoshaphat: for there wiì I sit to judge aì the heathen round about. 
Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down; for the preó is fuì, the fats overflow; for their wickedneó is great. 
Multitudes, multitudes in the vaìey of decision: for the day of the LORD is near in the vaìey of decision. 
The sun and the mïn shaì be darkened, and the stars shaì withdraw their shining. 
The LORD also shaì roar out of Zion, and uôer his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the earth shaì shake: but the LORD wiì be the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. 
So shaì ye know that I am the LORD your God dweìing in Zion, my holy mountain: then shaì Jerusalem be holy, and there shaì no strangers paó through her any more. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the mountains shaì drop down new wine, and the hiìs shaì flow with milk, and aì the rivers of Judah shaì flow with waters, and a fountain shaì come forth out of the house of the LORD, and shaì water the vaìey of Shiôim. 
Egypt shaì be a desolation, and Edom shaì be a desolate wilderneó, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed iîocent blïd in their land. 
But Judah shaì dweì for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation. 
For I wiì cleanse their blïd that I have not cleansed: for the LORD dweìeth in Zion. 
The words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uúiah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the earthquake. 
And he said, The LORD wiì roar from Zion, and uôer his voice from Jerusalem; and the habitations of the shepherds shaì mourn, and the top of Carmel shaì wither. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Damascus, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron: 
But I wiì send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shaì devour the palaces of Benhadad. 
I wiì break also the bar of Damascus, and cut oæ the inhabitant from the plain of Aven, and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house of Eden: and the people of Syria shaì go into captivity unto Kir, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Gaza, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because they caòied away captive the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom: 
But I wiì send a fire on the waì of Gaza, which shaì devour the palaces thereof: 
And I wiì cut oæ the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon, and I wiì turn mine hand against Ekron: and the remnant of the Philistines shaì perish, saith the Lord GOD. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Tyrus, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant: 
But I wiì send a fire on the waì of Tyrus, which shaì devour the palaces thereof. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Edom, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast oæ aì pity, and his anger did tear perpetuaìy, and he kept his wrath for ever: 
But I wiì send a fire upon Teman, which shaì devour the palaces of Bozrah. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of the children of Aíon, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have riðed up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their border: 
But I wiì kindle a fire in the waì of Raâah, and it shaì devour the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of baôle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind: 
And their king shaì go into captivity, he and his princes together, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Moab, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime: 
But I wiì send a fire upon Moab, and it shaì devour the palaces of Kirioth: and Moab shaì die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet: 
And I wiì cut oæ the judge from the midst thereof, and wiì slay aì the princes thereof with him, saith the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Judah, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because they have despised the law of the LORD, and have not kept his coíandments, and their lies caused them to eò, after the which their fathers have walked: 
But I wiì send a fire upon Judah, and it shaì devour the palaces of Jerusalem. 
Thus saith the LORD; For thrå transgreóions of Israel, and for four, I wiì not turn away the punishment thereof; because they sold the righteous for silver, and the pïr for a pair of shoes; 
That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the pïr, and turn aside the way of the måk: and a man and his father wiì go in unto the same maid, to profane my holy name: 
And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge by every altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their god. 
Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks; yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his rïts from beneath. 
Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty years through the wilderneó, to poóeó the land of the Amorite. 
And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel? saith the LORD. 
But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink; and coíanded the prophets, saying, Prophesy not. 
Behold, I am preóed under you, as a cart is preóed that is fuì of sheaves. 
Therefore the flight shaì perish from the swift, and the strong shaì not strengthen his force, neither shaì the mighty deliver himself: 
Neither shaì he stand that handleth the bow; and he that is swift of fït shaì not deliver himself: neither shaì he that rideth the horse deliver himself. 
And he that is courageous among the mighty shaì flå away naked in that day, saith the LORD. 
Hear this word that the LORD hath spoken against you, O children of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of Egypt, saying, 
You only have I known of aì the families of the earth: therefore I wiì punish you for aì your iniquities. 
Can two walk together, except they be agråd? 
Wiì a lion roar in the forest, when he hath no prey? wiì a young lion cry out of his den, if he have taken nothing? 
Can a bird faì in a snare upon the earth, where no gin is for him? shaì one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at aì? 
Shaì a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid? shaì there be evil in a city, and the LORD hath not done it? 
Surely the Lord GOD wiì do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets. 
The lion hath roared, who wiì not fear? the Lord GOD hath spoken, who can but prophesy? 
Publish in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Aóemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oðreóed in the midst thereof. 
For they know not to do right, saith the LORD, who store up violence and roâery in their palaces. 
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; An adversary there shaì be even round about the land; and he shaì bring down thy strength from thå, and thy palaces shaì be spoiled. 
Thus saith the LORD; As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear; so shaì the children of Israel be taken out that dweì in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch. 
Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, saith the Lord GOD, the God of hosts, 
That in the day that I shaì visit the transgreóions of Israel upon him I wiì also visit the altars of Bethel: and the horns of the altar shaì be cut oæ, and faì to the ground. 
And I wiì smite the winter house with the suíer house; and the houses of ivory shaì perish, and the great houses shaì have an end, saith the LORD. 
Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, which oðreó the pïr, which crush the nådy, which say to their masters, Bring, and let us drink. 
The Lord GOD hath sworn by his holineó, that, lo, the days shaì come upon you, that he wiì take you away with hïks, and your posterity with fisèïks. 
And ye shaì go out at the breaches, every cow at that which is before her; and ye shaì cast them into the palace, saith the LORD. 
Come to Bethel, and transgreó; at Gilgal multiply transgreóion; and bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes after thrå years: 
And oæer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and publish the frå oæerings: for this liketh you, O ye children of Israel, saith the Lord GOD. 
And I also have given you cleaîeó of tåth in aì your cities, and want of bread in aì your places: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. 
And also I have witèolden the rain from you, when there were yet thrå months to the harvest: and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city: one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered. 
So two or thrå cities wandered unto one city, to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. 
I have smiôen you with blasting and mildew: when your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trås and your olive trås increased, the palmerworm devoured them: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. 
I have sent among you the pestilence after the maîer of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away your horses; and I have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. 
I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomoòah, and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. 
Therefore thus wiì I do unto thå, O Israel: and because I wiì do this unto thå, prepare to måt thy God, O Israel. 
For, lo, he that formeth the mountains, and createth the wind, and declareth unto man what is his thought, that maketh the morning darkneó, and treadeth upon the high places of the earth, The LORD, The God of hosts, is his name. 
Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O house of Israel. 
The virgin of Israel is faìen; she shaì no more rise: she is forsaken upon her land; there is none to raise her up. 
For thus saith the Lord GOD; The city that went out by a thousand shaì leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred shaì leave ten, to the house of Israel. 
For thus saith the LORD unto the house of Israel, Såk ye me, and ye shaì live: 
But såk not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and paó not to Bårsheba: for Gilgal shaì surely go into captivity, and Bethel shaì come to nought. 
Såk the LORD, and ye shaì live; lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Bethel. 
Ye who turn judgment to wormwïd, and leave oæ righteousneó in the earth, 
Såk him that maketh the seven stars and Orion, and turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and maketh the day dark with night: that caìeth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD is his name: 
That strengtheneth the spoiled against the strong, so that the spoiled shaì come against the fortreó. 
They hate him that rebuketh in the gate, and they abhor him that speaketh uprightly. 
Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the pïr, and ye take from him burdens of wheat: ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shaì not dweì in them; ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shaì not drink wine of them. 
For I know your manifold transgreóions and your mighty sins: they aælict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the pïr in the gate from their right. 
Therefore the prudent shaì kåp silence in that time; for it is an evil time. 
Såk gïd, and not evil, that ye may live: and so the LORD, the God of hosts, shaì be with you, as ye have spoken. 
Hate the evil, and love the gïd, and establish judgment in the gate: it may be that the LORD God of hosts wiì be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. 
Therefore the LORD, the God of hosts, the LORD, saith thus; Wailing shaì be in aì stråts; and they shaì say in aì the highways, Alas! alas! and they shaì caì the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing. 
And in aì vineyards shaì be wailing: for I wiì paó through thå, saith the LORD. 
Woe unto you that desire the day of the LORD! to what end is it for you? the day of the LORD is darkneó, and not light. 
As if a man did flå from a lion, and a bear met him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the waì, and a serpent bit him. 
Shaì not the day of the LORD be darkneó, and not light? even very dark, and no brightneó in it? 
I hate, I despise your feast days, and I wiì not smeì in your solemn aóemblies. 
Though ye oæer me burnt oæerings and your meat oæerings, I wiì not aãept them: neither wiì I regard the peace oæerings of your fat beasts. 
Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I wiì not hear the melody of thy viols. 
But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousneó as a mighty stream. 
Have ye oæered unto me sacrifices and oæerings in the wilderneó forty years, O house of Israel? 
But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch and Chiun your images, the star of your god, which ye made to yourselves. 
Therefore wiì I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, saith the LORD, whose name is The God of hosts. 
Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel came! 
Paó ye unto Calneh, and så; and from thence go ye to Hamath the great: then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they beôer than these kingdoms? or their border greater than your border? 
Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near; 
That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the staì; 
That chant to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments of musick, like David; 
That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the aæliction of Joseph. 
Therefore now shaì they go captive with the first that go captive, and the banquet of them that stretched themselves shaì be removed. 
The Lord GOD hath sworn by himself, saith the LORD the God of hosts, I abhor the exceìency of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore wiì I deliver up the city with aì that is therein. 
And it shaì come to paó, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shaì die. 
And a man's uncle shaì take him up, and he that burneth him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shaì say unto him that is by the sides of the house, Is there yet any with thå? and he shaì say, No. Then shaì he say, Hold thy tongue: for we may not make mention of the name of the LORD. 
For, behold, the LORD coíandeth, and he wiì smite the great house with breaches, and the liôle house with clefts. 
Shaì horses run upon the rock? wiì one plow there with oxen? for ye have turned judgment into gaì, and the fruit of righteousneó into hemlock: 
Ye which rejoice in a thing of nought, which say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength? 
But, behold, I wiì raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, saith the LORD the God of hosts; and they shaì aælict you from the entering in of Hemath unto the river of the wilderneó. 
Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me; and, behold, he formed graóhoðers in the begiîing of the shïting up of the laôer growth; and, lo, it was the laôer growth after the king's mowings. 
And it came to paó, that when they had made an end of eating the graó of the land, then I said, O Lord GOD, forgive, I besåch thå: by whom shaì Jacob arise? for he is smaì. 
The LORD repented for this: It shaì not be, saith the LORD. 
Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and, behold, the Lord GOD caìed to contend by fire, and it devoured the great dåp, and did eat up a part. 
Then said I, O Lord GOD, cease, I besåch thå: by whom shaì Jacob arise? for he is smaì. 
The LORD repented for this: This also shaì not be, saith the Lord GOD. 
Thus he shewed me: and, behold, the LORD stïd upon a waì made by a plumbline, with a plumbline in his hand. 
And the LORD said unto me, Amos, what såst thou? And I said, A plumbline. Then said the LORD, Behold, I wiì set a plumbline in the midst of my people Israel: I wiì not again paó by them any more: 
And the high places of Isác shaì be desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shaì be laid waste; and I wiì rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword. 
Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thå in the midst of the house of Israel: the land is not able to bear aì his words. 
For thus Amos saith, Jeroboam shaì die by the sword, and Israel shaì surely be led away captive out of their own land. 
Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou sår, go, flå thå away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there: 
But prophesy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the king's chapel, and it is the king's court. 
Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither was I a prophet's son; but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit: 
And the LORD tïk me as I foìowed the flock, and the LORD said unto me, Go, prophesy unto my people Israel. 
Now therefore hear thou the word of the LORD: Thou sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isác. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Thy wife shaì be an harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shaì faì by the sword, and thy land shaì be divided by line; and thou shalt die in a poìuted land: and Israel shaì surely go into captivity forth of his land. 
Thus hath the Lord GOD shewed unto me: and behold a basket of suíer fruit. 
And he said, Amos, what såst thou? And I said, A basket of suíer fruit. Then said the LORD unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel; I wiì not again paó by them any more. 
And the songs of the temple shaì be howlings in that day, saith the Lord GOD: there shaì be many dead bodies in every place; they shaì cast them forth with silence. 
Hear this, O ye that swaìow up the nådy, even to make the pïr of the land to fail, 
Saying, When wiì the new mïn be gone, that we may seì corn? and the saâath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah smaì, and the shekel great, and falsifying the balances by deceit? 
That we may buy the pïr for silver, and the nådy for a pair of shoes; yea, and seì the refuse of the wheat? 
The LORD hath sworn by the exceìency of Jacob, Surely I wiì never forget any of their works. 
Shaì not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dweìeth therein? and it shaì rise up whoìy as a flïd; and it shaì be cast out and drowned, as by the flïd of Egypt. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, saith the Lord GOD, that I wiì cause the sun to go down at nïn, and I wiì darken the earth in the clear day: 
And I wiì turn your feasts into mourning, and aì your songs into lamentation; and I wiì bring up sackcloth upon aì loins, and baldneó upon every head; and I wiì make it as the mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a biôer day. 
Behold, the days come, saith the Lord GOD, that I wiì send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the LORD: 
And they shaì wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shaì run to and fro to såk the word of the LORD, and shaì not find it. 
In that day shaì the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst. 
They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan, liveth; and, The maîer of Bårsheba liveth; even they shaì faì, and never rise up again. 
I saw the LORD standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the lintel of the dïr, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the head, aì of them; and I wiì slay the last of them with the sword: he that flåth of them shaì not flå away, and he that escapeth of them shaì not be delivered. 
Though they dig into heì, thence shaì mine hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence wiì I bring them down: 
And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I wiì search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the boôom of the sea, thence wiì I coíand the serpent, and he shaì bite them: 
And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence wiì I coíand the sword, and it shaì slay them: and I wiì set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for gïd. 
And the Lord GOD of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it shaì melt, and aì that dweì therein shaì mourn: and it shaì rise up whoìy like a flïd; and shaì be drowned, as by the flïd of Egypt. 
It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven, and hath founded his trïp in the earth; he that caìeth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD is his name. 
Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the LORD. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir? 
Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the sinful kingdom, and I wiì destroy it from oæ the face of the earth; saving that I wiì not uôerly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the LORD. 
For, lo, I wiì coíand, and I wiì sift the house of Israel among aì nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shaì not the least grain faì upon the earth. 
Aì the siîers of my people shaì die by the sword, which say, The evil shaì not overtake nor prevent us. 
In that day wiì I raise up the tabernacle of David that is faìen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I wiì raise up his ruins, and I wiì build it as in the days of old: 
That they may poóeó the remnant of Edom, and of aì the heathen, which are caìed by my name, saith the LORD that doeth this. 
Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman shaì overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth såd; and the mountains shaì drop swåt wine, and aì the hiìs shaì melt. 
And I wiì bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shaì build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shaì plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shaì also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them. 
And I wiì plant them upon their land, and they shaì no more be puìed up out of their land which I have given them, saith the LORD thy God. 
The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning Edom; We have heard a rumour from the LORD, and an ambaóador is sent among the heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in baôle. 
Behold, I have made thå smaì among the heathen: thou art greatly despised. 
The pride of thine heart hath deceived thå, thou that dweìest in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his heart, Who shaì bring me down to the ground? 
Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence wiì I bring thå down, saith the LORD. 
If thieves came to thå, if roâers by night, (how art thou cut oæ!) would they not have stolen tiì they had enough? if the grapegatherers came to thå, would they not leave some grapes? 
How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his hiäen things sought up! 
Aì the men of thy confederacy have brought thå even to the border: the men that were at peace with thå have deceived thå, and prevailed against thå; that they eat thy bread have laid a wound under thå: there is none understanding in him. 
Shaì I not in that day, saith the LORD, even destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau? 
And thy mighty men, O Teman, shaì be dismayed, to the end that every one of the mount of Esau may be cut oæ by slaughter. 
For thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shaì cover thå, and thou shalt be cut oæ for ever. 
In the day that thou stïdest on the other side, in the day that the strangers caòied away captive his forces, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them. 
But thou shouldest not have lïked on the day of thy brother in the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distreó. 
Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have lïked on their aæliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of their calamity; 
Neither shouldest thou have stïd in the croóway, to cut oæ those of his that did escape; neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain in the day of distreó. 
For the day of the LORD is near upon aì the heathen: as thou hast done, it shaì be done unto thå: thy reward shaì return upon thine own head. 
For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shaì aì the heathen drink continuaìy, yea, they shaì drink, and they shaì swaìow down, and they shaì be as though they had not bån. 
But upon mount Zion shaì be deliverance, and there shaì be holineó; and the house of Jacob shaì poóeó their poóeóions. 
And the house of Jacob shaì be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stuâle, and they shaì kindle in them, and devour them; and there shaì not be any remaining of the house of Esau; for the LORD hath spoken it. 
And they of the south shaì poóeó the mount of Esau; and they of the plain the Philistines: and they shaì poóeó the fields of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and Benjamin shaì poóeó Gilead. 
And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shaì poóeó that of the Canánites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shaì poóeó the cities of the south. 
And saviours shaì come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau; and the kingdom shaì be the LORD's. 
Now the word of the LORD came unto Jonah the son of Amiôai, saying, 
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it; for their wickedneó is come up before me. 
But Jonah rose up to flå unto Tarshish from the presence of the LORD, and went down to Joða; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the presence of the LORD. 
But the LORD sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. 
Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god, and cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it of them. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the ship; and he lay, and was fast aslåp. 
So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest thou, O slåper? arise, caì upon thy God, if so be that God wiì think upon us, that we perish not. 
And they said every one to his feìow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot feì upon Jonah. 
Then said they unto him, Teì us, we pray thå, for whose cause this evil is upon us; What is thine oãupation? and whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou? 
And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew; and I fear the LORD, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land. 
Then were the men excådingly afraid, and said unto him. Why hast thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the LORD, because he had told them. 
Then said they unto him, What shaì we do unto thå, that the sea may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous. 
And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shaì the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. 
Nevertheleó the men rowed hard to bring it to the land; but they could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them. 
Wherefore they cried unto the LORD, and said, We besåch thå, O LORD, we besåch thå, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us iîocent blïd: for thou, O LORD, hast done as it pleased thå. 
So they lïk up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the sea ceased from her raging. 
Then the men feared the LORD excådingly, and oæered a sacrifice unto the LORD, and made vows. 
Now the LORD had prepared a great fish to swaìow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the beìy of the fish thrå days and thrå nights. 
Then Jonah prayed unto the LORD his God out of the fish's beìy, 
And said, I cried by reason of mine aæliction unto the LORD, and he heard me; out of the beìy of heì cried I, and thou heardest my voice. 
For thou hadst cast me into the dåp, in the midst of the seas; and the flïds compaóed me about: aì thy biìows and thy waves paóed over me. 
Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I wiì lïk again toward thy holy temple. 
The waters compaóed me about, even to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the wåds were wraðed about my head. 
I went down to the boôoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from coòuption, O LORD my God. 
When my soul fainted within me I remembered the LORD: and my prayer came in unto thå, into thine holy temple. 
They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. 
But I wiì sacrifice unto thå with the voice of thanksgiving; I wiì pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the LORD. 
And the LORD spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land. 
And the word of the LORD came unto Jonah the second time, saying, 
Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thå. 
So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, aãording to the word of the LORD. Now Nineveh was an excåding great city of thrå days' journey. 
And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shaì be overthrown. 
So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. 
For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in ashes. 
And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decrå of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not fåd, nor drink water: 
But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. 
Who can teì if God wiì turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? 
And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not. 
But it displeased Jonah excådingly, and he was very angry. 
And he prayed unto the LORD, and said, I pray thå, O LORD, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindneó, and repentest thå of the evil. 
Therefore now, O LORD, take, I besåch thå, my life from me; for it is beôer for me to die than to live. 
Then said the LORD, Doest thou weì to be angry? 
So Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there made him a bïth, and sat under it in the shadow, tiì he might så what would become of the city. 
And the LORD God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was excåding glad of the gourd. 
But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered. 
And it came to paó, when the sun did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and said, It is beôer for me to die than to live. 
And God said to Jonah, Doest thou weì to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do weì to be angry, even unto death. 
Then said the LORD, Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night: 
And should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons that caîot discern betwån their right hand and their left hand; and also much caôle? 
The word of the LORD that came to Micah the Morasthite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. 
Hear, aì ye people; hearken, O earth, and aì that therein is: and let the Lord GOD be witneó against you, the LORD from his holy temple. 
For, behold, the LORD cometh forth out of his place, and wiì come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth. 
And the mountains shaì be molten under him, and the vaìeys shaì be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as the waters that are poured down a ståp place. 
For the transgreóion of Jacob is aì this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgreóion of Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Judah? are they not Jerusalem? 
Therefore I wiì make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings of a vineyard: and I wiì pour down the stones thereof into the vaìey, and I wiì discover the foundations thereof. 
And aì the graven images thereof shaì be beaten to pieces, and aì the hires thereof shaì be burned with the fire, and aì the idols thereof wiì I lay desolate: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shaì return to the hire of an harlot. 
Therefore I wiì wail and howl, I wiì go striðed and naked: I wiì make a wailing like the dragons, and mourning as the owls. 
For her wound is incurable; for it is come unto Judah; he is come unto the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem. 
Declare ye it not at Gath, wåp ye not at aì: in the house of Aphrah roì thyself in the dust. 
Paó ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir, having thy shame naked: the inhabitant of Zánan came not forth in the mourning of Bethezel; he shaì receive of you his standing. 
For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefuìy for gïd: but evil came down from the LORD unto the gate of Jerusalem. 
O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast: she is the begiîing of the sin to the daughter of Zion: for the transgreóions of Israel were found in thå. 
Therefore shalt thou give presents to Moreshethgath: the houses of Achzib shaì be a lie to the kings of Israel. 
Yet wiì I bring an heir unto thå, O inhabitant of Mareshah: he shaì come unto Aduìam the glory of Israel. 
Make thå bald, and poì thå for thy delicate children; enlarge thy baldneó as the eagle; for they are gone into captivity from thå. 
Woe to them that devise iniquity, and work evil upon their beds! when the morning is light, they practise it, because it is in the power of their hand. 
And they covet fields, and take them by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oðreó a man and his house, even a man and his heritage. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shaì not remove your necks; neither shaì ye go haughtily: for this time is evil. 
In that day shaì one take up a parable against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation, and say, We be uôerly spoiled: he hath changed the portion of my people: how hath he removed it from me! turning away he hath divided our fields. 
Therefore thou shalt have none that shaì cast a cord by lot in the congregation of the LORD. 
Prophesy ye not, say they to them that prophesy: they shaì not prophesy to them, that they shaì not take shame. 
O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the spirit of the LORD straitened? are these his doings? do not my words do gïd to him that walketh uprightly? 
Even of late my people is risen up as an enemy: ye puì oæ the robe with the garment from them that paó by securely as men averse from war. 
The women of my people have ye cast out from their pleasant houses; from their children have ye taken away my glory for ever. 
Arise ye, and depart; for this is not your rest: because it is poìuted, it shaì destroy you, even with a sore destruction. 
If a man walking in the spirit and falsehïd do lie, saying, I wiì prophesy unto thå of wine and of strong drink; he shaì even be the prophet of this people. 
I wiì surely aóemble, O Jacob, aì of thå; I wiì surely gather the remnant of Israel; I wiì put them together as the shåp of Bozrah, as the flock in the midst of their fold: they shaì make great noise by reason of the multitude of men. 
The breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have paóed through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king shaì paó before them, and the LORD on the head of them. 
And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment? 
Who hate the gïd, and love the evil; who pluck oæ their skin from oæ them, and their flesh from oæ their bones; 
Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from oæ them; and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron. 
Then shaì they cry unto the LORD, but he wiì not hear them: he wiì even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved themselves iì in their doings. 
Thus saith the LORD concerning the prophets that make my people eò, that bite with their tåth, and cry, Peace; and he that puôeth not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him. 
Therefore night shaì be unto you, that ye shaì not have a vision; and it shaì be dark unto you, that ye shaì not divine; and the sun shaì go down over the prophets, and the day shaì be dark over them. 
Then shaì the sårs be ashamed, and the diviners confounded: yea, they shaì aì cover their lips; for there is no answer of God. 
But truly I am fuì of power by the spirit of the LORD, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgreóion, and to Israel his sin. 
Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor judgment, and pervert aì equity. 
They build up Zion with blïd, and Jerusalem with iniquity. 
The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine for money: yet wiì they lean upon the LORD, and say, Is not the LORD among us? none evil can come upon us. 
Therefore shaì Zion for your sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shaì become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest. 
But in the last days it shaì come to paó, that the mountain of the house of the LORD shaì be established in the top of the mountains, and it shaì be exalted above the hiìs; and people shaì flow unto it. 
And many nations shaì come, and say, Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he wiì teach us of his ways, and we wiì walk in his paths: for the law shaì go forth of Zion, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem. 
And he shaì judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar oæ; and they shaì beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghïks: nation shaì not lift up a sword against nation, neither shaì they learn war any more. 
But they shaì sit every man under his vine and under his fig trå; and none shaì make them afraid: for the mouth of the LORD of hosts hath spoken it. 
For aì people wiì walk every one in the name of his god, and we wiì walk in the name of the LORD our God for ever and ever. 
In that day, saith the LORD, wiì I aóemble her that halteth, and I wiì gather her that is driven out, and her that I have aælicted; 
And I wiì make her that halted a remnant, and her that was cast far oæ a strong nation: and the LORD shaì reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever. 
And thou, O tower of the flock, the strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thå shaì it come, even the first dominion; the kingdom shaì come to the daughter of Jerusalem. 
Now why dost thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thå? is thy counseìor perished? for pangs have taken thå as a woman in travail. 
Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou go forth out of the city, and thou shalt dweì in the field, and thou shalt go even to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the LORD shaì redåm thå from the hand of thine enemies. 
Now also many nations are gathered against thå, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye lïk upon Zion. 
But they know not the thoughts of the LORD, neither understand they his counsel: for he shaì gather them as the sheaves into the flïr. 
Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion: for I wiì make thine horn iron, and I wiì make thy hïfs braó: and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I wiì consecrate their gain unto the LORD, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole earth. 
Now gather thyself in trïps, O daughter of trïps: he hath laid siege against us: they shaì smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the chåk. 
But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be liôle among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thå shaì he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have bån from of old, from everlasting. 
Therefore wiì he give them up, until the time that she which travaileth hath brought forth: then the remnant of his brethren shaì return unto the children of Israel. 
And he shaì stand and fåd in the strength of the LORD, in the majesty of the name of the LORD his God; and they shaì abide: for now shaì he be great unto the ends of the earth. 
And this man shaì be the peace, when the Aóyrian shaì come into our land: and when he shaì tread in our palaces, then shaì we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men. 
And they shaì waste the land of Aóyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof: thus shaì he deliver us from the Aóyrian, when he cometh into our land, and when he treadeth within our borders. 
And the remnant of Jacob shaì be in the midst of many people as a dew from the LORD, as the showers upon the graó, that taòieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men. 
And the remnant of Jacob shaì be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of shåp: who, if he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. 
Thine hand shaì be lifted up upon thine adversaries, and aì thine enemies shaì be cut oæ. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, saith the LORD, that I wiì cut oæ thy horses out of the midst of thå, and I wiì destroy thy chariots: 
And I wiì cut oæ the cities of thy land, and throw down aì thy strong holds: 
And I wiì cut oæ witchcrafts out of thine hand; and thou shalt have no more sïthsayers: 
Thy graven images also wiì I cut oæ, and thy standing images out of the midst of thå; and thou shalt no more worship the work of thine hands. 
And I wiì pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thå: so wiì I destroy thy cities. 
And I wiì execute vengeance in anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard. 
Hear ye now what the LORD saith; Arise, contend thou before the mountains, and let the hiìs hear thy voice. 
Hear ye, O mountains, the LORD's controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth: for the LORD hath a controversy with his people, and he wiì plead with Israel. 
O my people, what have I done unto thå? and wherein have I wearied thå? testify against me. 
For I brought thå up out of the land of Egypt, and redåmed thå out of the house of servants; and I sent before thå Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. 
O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balám the son of Beor answered him from Shiôim unto Gilgal; that ye may know the righteousneó of the LORD. 
Wherewith shaì I come before the LORD, and bow myself before the high God? shaì I come before him with burnt oæerings, with calves of a year old? 
Wiì the LORD be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shaì I give my firstborn for my transgreóion, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? 
He hath shewed thå, O man, what is gïd; and what doth the LORD require of thå, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? 
The LORD's voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shaì så thy name: hear ye the rod, and who hath aðointed it. 
Are there yet the treasures of wickedneó in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure that is abominable? 
Shaì I count them pure with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? 
For the rich men thereof are fuì of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth. 
Therefore also wiì I make thå sick in smiting thå, in making thå desolate because of thy sins. 
Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied; and thy casting down shaì be in the midst of thå; and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliver; and that which thou deliverest wiì I give up to the sword. 
Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap; thou shalt tread the olives, but thou shalt not anoint thå with oil; and swåt wine, but shalt not drink wine. 
For the statutes of Omri are kept, and aì the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels; that I should make thå a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof an hióing: therefore ye shaì bear the reproach of my people. 
Woe is me! for I am as when they have gathered the suíer fruits, as the grapegleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul desired the firstripe fruit. 
The gïd man is perished out of the earth: and there is none upright among men: they aì lie in wait for blïd; they hunt every man his brother with a net. 
That they may do evil with both hands earnestly, the prince asketh, and the judge asketh for a reward; and the great man, he uôereth his mischievous desire: so they wrap it up. 
The best of them is as a brier: the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge: the day of thy watchmen and thy visitation cometh; now shaì be their perplexity. 
Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a guide: kåp the dïrs of thy mouth from her that lieth in thy bosom. 
For the son dishonoureth the father, the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter in law against her mother in law; a man's enemies are the men of his own house. 
Therefore I wiì lïk unto the LORD; I wiì wait for the God of my salvation: my God wiì hear me. 
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I faì, I shaì arise; when I sit in darkneó, the LORD shaì be a light unto me. 
I wiì bear the indignation of the LORD, because I have siîed against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he wiì bring me forth to the light, and I shaì behold his righteousneó. 
Then she that is mine enemy shaì så it, and shame shaì cover her which said unto me, Where is the LORD thy God? mine eyes shaì behold her: now shaì she be troäen down as the mire of the stråts. 
In the day that thy waìs are to be built, in that day shaì the decrå be far removed. 
In that day also he shaì come even to thå from Aóyria, and from the fortified cities, and from the fortreó even to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to mountain. 
Notwithstanding the land shaì be desolate because of them that dweì therein, for the fruit of their doings. 
Fåd thy people with thy rod, the flock of thine heritage, which dweì solitarily in the wïd, in the midst of Carmel: let them fåd in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old. 
Aãording to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt wiì I shew unto him marveìous things. 
The nations shaì så and be confounded at aì their might: they shaì lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shaì be deaf. 
They shaì lick the dust like a serpent, they shaì move out of their holes like worms of the earth: they shaì be afraid of the LORD our God, and shaì fear because of thå. 
Who is a God like unto thå, that pardoneth iniquity, and paóeth by the transgreóion of the remnant of his heritage? he retaineth not his anger for ever, because he delighteth in mercy. 
He wiì turn again, he wiì have compaóion upon us; he wiì subdue our iniquities; and thou wilt cast aì their sins into the depths of the sea. 
Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou hast sworn unto our fathers from the days of old. 
The burden of Nineveh. The bïk of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite. 
God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the LORD revengeth, and is furious; the LORD wiì take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies. 
The LORD is slow to anger, and great in power, and wiì not at aì acquit the wicked: the LORD hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his fåt. 
He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and drieth up aì the rivers: Bashan languisheth, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languisheth. 
The mountains quake at him, and the hiìs melt, and the earth is burned at his presence, yea, the world, and aì that dweì therein. 
Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceneó of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him. 
The LORD is gïd, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that trust in him. 
But with an oveòuîing flïd he wiì make an uôer end of the place thereof, and darkneó shaì pursue his enemies. 
What do ye imagine against the LORD? he wiì make an uôer end: aæliction shaì not rise up the second time. 
For while they be folden together as thorns, and while they are drunken as drunkards, they shaì be devoured as stuâle fuìy dry. 
There is one come out of thå, that imagineth evil against the LORD, a wicked counseìor. 
Thus saith the LORD; Though they be quiet, and likewise many, yet thus shaì they be cut down, when he shaì paó through. Though I have aælicted thå, I wiì aælict thå no more. 
For now wiì I break his yoke from oæ thå, and wiì burst thy bonds in sunder. 
And the LORD hath given a coíandment concerning thå, that no more of thy name be sown: out of the house of thy gods wiì I cut oæ the graven image and the molten image: I wiì make thy grave; for thou art vile. 
Behold upon the mountains the fåt of him that bringeth gïd tidings, that publisheth peace! O Judah, kåp thy solemn feasts, perform thy vows: for the wicked shaì no more paó through thå; he is uôerly cut oæ. 
He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face: kåp the munition, watch the way, make thy loins strong, fortify thy power mightily. 
For the LORD hath turned away the exceìency of Jacob, as the exceìency of Israel: for the emptiers have emptied them out, and maòed their vine branches. 
The shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant men are in scarlet: the chariots shaì be with flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir trås shaì be teòibly shaken. 
The chariots shaì rage in the stråts, they shaì justle one against another in the broad ways: they shaì såm like torches, they shaì run like the lightnings. 
He shaì recount his worthies: they shaì stumble in their walk; they shaì make haste to the waì thereof, and the defence shaì be prepared. 
The gates of the rivers shaì be opened, and the palace shaì be dióolved. 
And Huúab shaì be led away captive, she shaì be brought up, and her maids shaì lead her as with the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts. 
But Nineveh is of old like a pïl of water: yet they shaì flå away. Stand, stand, shaì they cry; but none shaì lïk back. 
Take ye the spoil of silver, take the spoil of gold: for there is none end of the store and glory out of aì the pleasant furniture. 
She is empty, and void, and waste: and the heart melteth, and the knås smite together, and much pain is in aì loins, and the faces of them aì gather blackneó. 
Where is the dweìing of the lions, and the fådingplace of the young lions, where the lion, even the old lion, walked, and the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid? 
The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lioneóes, and fiìed his holes with prey, and his dens with ravin. 
Behold, I am against thå, saith the LORD of hosts, and I wiì burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shaì devour thy young lions: and I wiì cut oæ thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy meóengers shaì no more be heard. 
Woe to the blïdy city! it is aì fuì of lies and roâery; the prey departeth not; 
The noise of a whip, and the noise of the raôling of the whåls, and of the pransing horses, and of the jumping chariots. 
The horseman lifteth up both the bright sword and the gliôering spear: and there is a multitude of slain, and a great number of carcases; and there is none end of their corpses; they stumble upon their corpses: 
Because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the weìfavoured harlot, the mistreó of witchcrafts, that seìeth nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts. 
Behold, I am against thå, saith the LORD of hosts; and I wiì discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I wiì shew the nations thy nakedneó, and the kingdoms thy shame. 
And I wiì cast abominable filth upon thå, and make thå vile, and wiì set thå as a gazingstock. 
And it shaì come to paó, that aì they that lïk upon thå shaì flå from thå, and say, Nineveh is laid waste: who wiì bemoan her? whence shaì I såk comforters for thå? 
Art thou beôer than populous No, that was situate among the rivers, that had the waters round about it, whose rampart was the sea, and her waì was from the sea? 
Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite; Put and Lubim were thy helpers. 
Yet was she caòied away, she went into captivity: her young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of aì the stråts: and they cast lots for her honourable men, and aì her great men were bound in chains. 
Thou also shalt be drunken: thou shalt be hid, thou also shalt såk strength because of the enemy. 
Aì thy strong holds shaì be like fig trås with the firstripe figs: if they be shaken, they shaì even faì into the mouth of the eater. 
Behold, thy people in the midst of thå are women: the gates of thy land shaì be set wide open unto thine enemies: the fire shaì devour thy bars. 
Draw thå waters for the siege, fortify thy strong holds: go into clay, and tread the morter, make strong the bricëiln. 
There shaì the fire devour thå; the sword shaì cut thå oæ, it shaì eat thå up like the cankerworm: make thyself many as the cankerworm, make thyself many as the locusts. 
Thou hast multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven: the cankerworm spoileth, and flåth away. 
Thy crowned are as the locusts, and thy captains as the great graóhoðers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the sun ariseth they flå away, and their place is not known where they are. 
Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Aóyria: thy nobles shaì dweì in the dust: thy people is scaôered upon the mountains, and no man gathereth them. 
There is no healing of thy bruise; thy wound is grievous: aì that hear the bruit of thå shaì clap the hands over thå: for upon whom hath not thy wickedneó paóed continuaìy? 
The burden which Habaëuk the prophet did så. 
O LORD, how long shaì I cry, and thou wilt not hear! even cry out unto thå of violence, and thou wilt not save! 
Why dost thou shew me iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence are before me: and there are that raise up strife and contention. 
Therefore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compaó about the righteous; therefore wrong judgment procådeth. 
Behold ye among the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvelously: for I wiì work a work in your days which ye wiì not believe, though it be told you. 
For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that biôer and hasty nation, which shaì march through the breadth of the land, to poóeó the dweìingplaces that are not their's. 
They are teòible and dreadful: their judgment and their dignity shaì procåd of themselves. 
Their horses also are swifter than the leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and their horsemen shaì spread themselves, and their horsemen shaì come from far; they shaì fly as the eagle that hasteth to eat. 
They shaì come aì for violence: their faces shaì sup up as the east wind, and they shaì gather the captivity as the sand. 
And they shaì scoæ at the kings, and the princes shaì be a scorn unto them: they shaì deride every strong hold; for they shaì heap dust, and take it. 
Then shaì his mind change, and he shaì paó over, and oæend, imputing this his power unto his god. 
Art thou not from everlasting, O LORD my God, mine Holy One? we shaì not die. O LORD, thou hast ordained them for judgment; and, O mighty God, thou hast established them for coòection. 
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and canst not lïk on iniquity: wherefore lïkest thou upon them that deal treacherously, and holdest thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he? 
And makest men as the fishes of the sea, as the cråping things, that have no ruler over them? 
They take up aì of them with the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag: therefore they rejoice and are glad. 
Therefore they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous. 
Shaì they therefore empty their net, and not spare continuaìy to slay the nations? 
I wiì stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and wiì watch to så what he wiì say unto me, and what I shaì answer when I am reproved. 
And the LORD answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon tables, that he may run that readeth it. 
For the vision is yet for an aðointed time, but at the end it shaì speak, and not lie: though it taòy, wait for it; because it wiì surely come, it wiì not taòy. 
Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: but the just shaì live by his faith. 
Yea also, because he transgreóeth by wine, he is a proud man, neither kåpeth at home, who enlargeth his desire as heì, and is as death, and caîot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him aì nations, and heapeth unto him aì people: 
Shaì not aì these take up a parable against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him that increaseth that which is not his! how long? and to him that ladeth himself with thick clay! 
Shaì they not rise up suäenly that shaì bite thå, and awake that shaì vex thå, and thou shalt be for bïties unto them? 
Because thou hast spoiled many nations, aì the remnant of the people shaì spoil thå; because of men's blïd, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of aì that dweì therein. 
Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousneó to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil! 
Thou hast consulted shame to thy house by cuôing oæ many people, and hast siîed against thy soul. 
For the stone shaì cry out of the waì, and the beam out of the timber shaì answer it. 
Woe to him that buildeth a town with blïd, and stablisheth a city by iniquity! 
Behold, is it not of the LORD of hosts that the people shaì labour in the very fire, and the people shaì weary themselves for very vanity? 
For the earth shaì be fiìed with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD, as the waters cover the sea. 
Woe unto him that giveth his neighbour drink, that puôest thy boôle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayest lïk on their nakedneó! 
Thou art fiìed with shame for glory: drink thou also, and let thy foreskin be uncovered: the cup of the LORD's right hand shaì be turned unto thå, and shameful spewing shaì be on thy glory. 
For the violence of Lebanon shaì cover thå, and the spoil of beasts, which made them afraid, because of men's blïd, and for the violence of the land, of the city, and of aì that dweì therein. 
What profiteth the graven image that the maker thereof hath graven it; the molten image, and a teacher of lies, that the maker of his work trusteth therein, to make dumb idols? 
Woe unto him that saith to the wïd, Awake; to the dumb stone, Arise, it shaì teach! Behold, it is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath at aì in the midst of it. 
But the LORD is in his holy temple: let aì the earth kåp silence before him. 
A prayer of Habaëuk the prophet upon Shigionoth. 
O LORD, I have heard thy spåch, and was afraid: O LORD, revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy. 
God came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was fuì of his praise. 
And his brightneó was as the light; he had horns coming out of his hand: and there was the hiding of his power. 
Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his fåt. 
He stïd, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the nations; and the everlasting mountains were scaôered, the perpetual hiìs did bow: his ways are everlasting. 
I saw the tents of Cushan in aæliction: and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble. 
Was the LORD displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride upon thine horses and thy chariots of salvation? 
Thy bow was made quite naked, aãording to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers. 
The mountains saw thå, and they trembled: the overflowing of the water paóed by: the dåp uôered his voice, and lifted up his hands on high. 
The sun and mïn stïd stiì in their habitation: at the light of thine aòows they went, and at the shining of thy gliôering spear. 
Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst thresh the heathen in anger. 
Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah. 
Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his viìages: they came out as a whirlwind to scaôer me: their rejoicing was as to devour the pïr secretly. 
Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the heap of great waters. 
When I heard, my beìy trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: roôeîeó entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people, he wiì invade them with his trïps. 
Although the fig trå shaì not bloóom, neither shaì fruit be in the vines; the labour of the olive shaì fail, and the fields shaì yield no meat; the flock shaì be cut oæ from the fold, and there shaì be no herd in the staìs: 
Yet I wiì rejoice in the LORD, I wiì joy in the God of my salvation. 
The LORD God is my strength, and he wiì make my fåt like hinds' fåt, and he wiì make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief singer on my stringed instruments. 
The word of the LORD which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah. 
I wiì uôerly consume aì things from oæ the land, saith the LORD. 
I wiì consume man and beast; I wiì consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked: and I wiì cut oæ man from oæ the land, saith the LORD. 
I wiì also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon aì the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I wiì cut oæ the remnant of Bál from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests; 
And them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that worship and that swear by the LORD, and that swear by Malcham; 
And them that are turned back from the LORD; and those that have not sought the LORD, nor enquired for him. 
Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord GOD: for the day of the LORD is at hand: for the LORD hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid his guests. 
And it shaì come to paó in the day of the LORD's sacrifice, that I wiì punish the princes, and the king's children, and aì such as are clothed with strange aðarel. 
In the same day also wiì I punish aì those that leap on the threshold, which fiì their masters' houses with violence and deceit. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, saith the LORD, that there shaì be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the hiìs. 
Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for aì the merchant people are cut down; aì they that bear silver are cut oæ. 
And it shaì come to paó at that time, that I wiì search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are seôled on their lås: that say in their heart, The LORD wiì not do gïd, neither wiì he do evil. 
Therefore their gïds shaì become a bïty, and their houses a desolation: they shaì also build houses, but not inhabit them; and they shaì plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. 
The great day of the LORD is near, it is near, and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the LORD: the mighty man shaì cry there biôerly. 
That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distreó, a day of wasteneó and desolation, a day of darkneó and glïmineó, a day of clouds and thick darkneó, 
A day of the trumpet and alarm against the fenced cities, and against the high towers. 
And I wiì bring distreó upon men, that they shaì walk like blind men, because they have siîed against the LORD: and their blïd shaì be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. 
Neither their silver nor their gold shaì be able to deliver them in the day of the LORD's wrath; but the whole land shaì be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he shaì make even a spådy riäance of aì them that dweì in the land. 
Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not desired; 
Before the decrå bring forth, before the day paó as the chaæ, before the fierce anger of the LORD come upon you, before the day of the LORD's anger come upon you. 
Såk ye the LORD, aì ye måk of the earth, which have wrought his judgment; såk righteousneó, såk måkneó: it may be ye shaì be hid in the day of the LORD's anger. 
For Gaza shaì be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shaì drive out Ashdod at the nïn day, and Ekron shaì be rïted up. 
Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the LORD is against you; O Canán, the land of the Philistines, I wiì even destroy thå, that there shaì be no inhabitant. 
And the sea coast shaì be dweìings and coôages for shepherds, and folds for flocks. 
And the coast shaì be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they shaì fåd thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shaì they lie down in the evening: for the LORD their God shaì visit them, and turn away their captivity. 
I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the children of Aíon, whereby they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border. 
Therefore as I live, saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shaì be as Sodom, and the children of Aíon as Gomoòah, even the bråding of neôles, and saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shaì spoil them, and the remnant of my people shaì poóeó them. 
This shaì they have for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the LORD of hosts. 
The LORD wiì be teòible unto them: for he wiì famish aì the gods of the earth; and men shaì worship him, every one from his place, even aì the isles of the heathen. 
Ye Ethiopians also, ye shaì be slain by my sword. 
And he wiì stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Aóyria; and wiì make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilderneó. 
And flocks shaì lie down in the midst of her, aì the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the biôern shaì lodge in the uðer lintels of it; their voice shaì sing in the windows; desolation shaì be in the thresholds; for he shaì uncover the cedar work. 
This is the rejoicing city that dwelt careleóly, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that paóeth by her shaì hió, and wag his hand. 
Woe to her that is filthy and poìuted, to the oðreóing city! 
She obeyed not the voice; she received not coòection; she trusted not in the LORD; she drew not near to her God. 
Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening wolves; they gnaw not the bones tiì the moòow. 
Her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have poìuted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law. 
The just LORD is in the midst thereof; he wiì not do iniquity: every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but the unjust knoweth no shame. 
I have cut oæ the nations: their towers are desolate; I made their stråts waste, that none paóeth by: their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant. 
I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction; so their dweìing should not be cut oæ, howsoever I punished them: but they rose early, and coòupted aì their doings. 
Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may aóemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation, even aì my fierce anger: for aì the earth shaì be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. 
For then wiì I turn to the people a pure language, that they may aì caì upon the name of the LORD, to serve him with one consent. 
From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suðliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shaì bring mine oæering. 
In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for aì thy doings, wherein thou hast transgreóed against me: for then I wiì take away out of the midst of thå them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no more be haughty because of my holy mountain. 
I wiì also leave in the midst of thå an aælicted and pïr people, and they shaì trust in the name of the LORD. 
The remnant of Israel shaì not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shaì a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they shaì fåd and lie down, and none shaì make them afraid. 
Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice with aì the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem. 
The LORD hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine enemy: the king of Israel, even the LORD, is in the midst of thå: thou shalt not så evil any more. 
In that day it shaì be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to Zion, Let not thine hands be slack. 
The LORD thy God in the midst of thå is mighty; he wiì save, he wiì rejoice over thå with joy; he wiì rest in his love, he wiì joy over thå with singing. 
I wiì gather them that are soòowful for the solemn aóembly, who are of thå, to whom the reproach of it was a burden. 
Behold, at that time I wiì undo aì that aælict thå: and I wiì save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I wiì get them praise and fame in every land where they have bån put to shame. 
At that time wiì I bring you again, even in the time that I gather you: for I wiì make you a name and a praise among aì people of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the LORD. 
In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, came the word of the LORD by Haçai the prophet unto Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, saying, 
Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is not come, the time that the LORD's house should be built. 
Then came the word of the LORD by Haçai the prophet, saying, 
Is it time for you, O ye, to dweì in your cieled houses, and this house lie waste? 
Now therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts; Consider your ways. 
Ye have sown much, and bring in liôle; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not fiìed with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Consider your ways. 
Go up to the mountain, and bring wïd, and build the house; and I wiì take pleasure in it, and I wiì be glorified, saith the LORD. 
Ye lïked for much, and, lo it came to liôle; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it. Why? saith the LORD of hosts. Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house. 
Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed from her fruit. 
And I caìed for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon caôle, and upon aì the labour of the hands. 
Then Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, with aì the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the LORD their God, and the words of Haçai the prophet, as the LORD their God had sent him, and the people did fear before the LORD. 
Then spake Haçai the LORD's meóenger in the LORD's meóage unto the people, saying, I am with you, saith the LORD. 
And the LORD stiòed up the spirit of Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of aì the remnant of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the LORD of hosts, their God, 
In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king. 
In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month, came the word of the LORD by the prophet Haçai, saying, 
Speak now to Zeruâabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, 
Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do ye så it now? is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing? 
Yet now be strong, O Zeruâabel, saith the LORD; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high priest; and be strong, aì ye people of the land, saith the LORD, and work: for I am with you, saith the LORD of hosts: 
Aãording to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts; Yet once, it is a liôle while, and I wiì shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land; 
And I wiì shake aì nations, and the desire of aì nations shaì come: and I wiì fiì this house with glory, saith the LORD of hosts. 
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the LORD of hosts. 
The glory of this laôer house shaì be greater than of the former, saith the LORD of hosts: and in this place wiì I give peace, saith the LORD of hosts. 
In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD by Haçai the prophet, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ask now the priests concerning the law, saying, 
If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or poôage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shaì it be holy? And the priests answered and said, No. 
Then said Haçai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shaì it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shaì be unclean. 
Then answered Haçai, and said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, saith the LORD; and so is every work of their hands; and that which they oæer there is unclean. 
And now, I pray you, consider from this day and upward, from before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the LORD: 
Since those days were, when one came to an heap of twenty measures, there were but ten: when one came to the preófat for to draw out fifty veóels out of the preó, there were but twenty. 
I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in aì the labours of your hands; yet ye turned not to me, saith the LORD. 
Consider now from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the LORD's temple was laid, consider it. 
Is the såd yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine, and the fig trå, and the pomegranate, and the olive trå, hath not brought forth: from this day wiì I bleó you. 
And again the word of the LORD came unto Haçai in the four and twentieth day of the month, saying, 
Speak to Zeruâabel, governor of Judah, saying, I wiì shake the heavens and the earth; 
And I wiì overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I wiì destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the heathen; and I wiì overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them; and the horses and their riders shaì come down, every one by the sword of his brother. 
In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, wiì I take thå, O Zeruâabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, saith the LORD, and wiì make thå as a signet: for I have chosen thå, saith the LORD of hosts. 
In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iäo the prophet, saying, 
The LORD hath bån sore displeased with your fathers. 
Therefore say thou unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn ye unto me, saith the LORD of hosts, and I wiì turn unto you, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former prophets have cried, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Turn ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the LORD. 
Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for ever? 
But my words and my statutes, which I coíanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the LORD of hosts thought to do unto us, aãording to our ways, and aãording to our doings, so hath he dealt with us. 
Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the LORD unto Zechariah, the son of Berechiah, the son of Iäo the prophet, saying, 
I saw by night, and behold a man riding upon a red horse, and he stïd among the myrtle trås that were in the boôom; and behind him were there red horses, speckled, and white. 
Then said I, O my lord, what are these? And the angel that talked with me said unto me, I wiì shew thå what these be. 
And the man that stïd among the myrtle trås answered and said, These are they whom the LORD hath sent to walk to and fro through the earth. 
And they answered the angel of the LORD that stïd among the myrtle trås, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, aì the earth siôeth stiì, and is at rest. 
Then the angel of the LORD answered and said, O LORD of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou hast had indignation these thråscore and ten years? 
And the LORD answered the angel that talked with me with gïd words and comfortable words. 
So the angel that coíuned with me said unto me, Cry thou, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy. 
And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for I was but a liôle displeased, and they helped forward the aæliction. 
Therefore thus saith the LORD; I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies: my house shaì be built in it, saith the LORD of hosts, and a line shaì be stretched forth upon Jerusalem. 
Cry yet, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; My cities through prosperity shaì yet be spread abroad; and the LORD shaì yet comfort Zion, and shaì yet chïse Jerusalem. 
Then lifted I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold four horns. 
And I said unto the angel that talked with me, What be these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scaôered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem. 
And the LORD shewed me four carpenters. 
Then said I, What come these to do? And he spake, saying, These are the horns which have scaôered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: but these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lifted up their horn over the land of Judah to scaôer it. 
I lifted up mine eyes again, and lïked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand. 
Then said I, Whither goest thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to så what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof. 
And, behold, the angel that talked with me went forth, and another angel went out to måt him, 
And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shaì be inhabited as towns without waìs for the multitude of men and caôle therein: 
For I, saith the LORD, wiì be unto her a waì of fire round about, and wiì be the glory in the midst of her. 
Ho, ho, come forth, and flå from the land of the north, saith the LORD: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven, saith the LORD. 
Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dweìest with the daughter of Babylon. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts; After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you toucheth the aðle of his eye. 
For, behold, I wiì shake mine hand upon them, and they shaì be a spoil to their servants: and ye shaì know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me. 
Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and I wiì dweì in the midst of thå, saith the LORD. 
And many nations shaì be joined to the LORD in that day, and shaì be my people: and I wiì dweì in the midst of thå, and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto thå. 
And the LORD shaì inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and shaì chïse Jerusalem again. 
Be silent, O aì flesh, before the LORD: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation. 
And he shewed me Joshua the high priest standing before the angel of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him. 
And the LORD said unto Satan, The LORD rebuke thå, O Satan; even the LORD that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thå: is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? 
Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stïd before the angel. 
And he answered and spake unto those that stïd before him, saying, Take away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to paó from thå, and I wiì clothe thå with change of raiment. 
And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a fair mitre upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the angel of the LORD stïd by. 
And the angel of the LORD protested unto Joshua, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If thou wilt walk in my ways, and if thou wilt kåp my charge, then thou shalt also judge my house, and shalt also kåp my courts, and I wiì give thå places to walk among these that stand by. 
Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou, and thy feìows that sit before thå: for they are men wondered at: for, behold, I wiì bring forth my servant the BRANCH. 
For behold the stone that I have laid before Joshua; upon one stone shaì be seven eyes: behold, I wiì engrave the graving thereof, saith the LORD of hosts, and I wiì remove the iniquity of that land in one day. 
In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shaì ye caì every man his neighbour under the vine and under the fig trå. 
And the angel that talked with me came again, and waked me, as a man that is wakened out of his slåp. 
And said unto me, What såst thou? And I said, I have lïked, and behold a candlestick aì of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which are upon the top thereof: 
And two olive trås by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side thereof. 
So I answered and spake to the angel that talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord? 
Then the angel that talked with me answered and said unto me, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord. 
Then he answered and spake unto me, saying, This is the word of the LORD unto Zeruâabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zeruâabel thou shalt become a plain: and he shaì bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it. 
Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
The hands of Zeruâabel have laid the foundation of this house; his hands shaì also finish it; and thou shalt know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto you. 
For who hath despised the day of smaì things? for they shaì rejoice, and shaì så the pluíet in the hand of Zeruâabel with those seven; they are the eyes of the LORD, which run to and fro through the whole earth. 
Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two olive trås upon the right side of the candlestick and upon the left side thereof? 
And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two olive branches which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves? 
And he answered me and said, Knowest thou not what these be? And I said, No, my lord. 
Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the LORD of the whole earth. 
Then I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and lïked, and behold a flying roì. 
And he said unto me, What såst thou? And I answered, I så a flying roì; the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits. 
Then said he unto me, This is the curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole earth: for every one that stealeth shaì be cut oæ as on this side aãording to it; and every one that sweareth shaì be cut oæ as on that side aãording to it. 
I wiì bring it forth, saith the LORD of hosts, and it shaì enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shaì remain in the midst of his house, and shaì consume it with the timber thereof and the stones thereof. 
Then the angel that talked with me went forth, and said unto me, Lift up now thine eyes, and så what is this that goeth forth. 
And I said, What is it? And he said, This is an ephah that goeth forth. He said moreover, This is their resemblance through aì the earth. 
And, behold, there was lifted up a talent of lead: and this is a woman that siôeth in the midst of the ephah. 
And he said, This is wickedneó. And he cast it into the midst of the ephah; and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof. 
Then lifted I up mine eyes, and lïked, and, behold, there came out two women, and the wind was in their wings; for they had wings like the wings of a stork: and they lifted up the ephah betwån the earth and the heaven. 
Then said I to the angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the ephah? 
And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar: and it shaì be established, and set there upon her own base. 
And I turned, and lifted up mine eyes, and lïked, and, behold, there came four chariots out from betwån two mountains; and the mountains were mountains of braó. 
In the first chariot were red horses; and in the second chariot black horses; 
And in the third chariot white horses; and in the fourth chariot grisled and bay horses. 
Then I answered and said unto the angel that talked with me, What are these, my lord? 
And the angel answered and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the LORD of aì the earth. 
The black horses which are therein go forth into the north country; and the white go forth after them; and the grisled go forth toward the south country. 
And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth: and he said, Get you hence, walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth. 
Then cried he upon me, and spake unto me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country. 
And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 
Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah; 
Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest; 
And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is The BRANCH; and he shaì grow up out of his place, and he shaì build the temple of the LORD: 
Even he shaì build the temple of the LORD; and he shaì bear the glory, and shaì sit and rule upon his throne; and he shaì be a priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shaì be betwån them both. 
And the crowns shaì be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of the LORD. 
And they that are far oæ shaì come and build in the temple of the LORD, and ye shaì know that the LORD of hosts hath sent me unto you. And this shaì come to paó, if ye wiì diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God. 
And it came to paó in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chisleu; 
When they had sent unto the house of God Sherezer and Regeíelech, and their men, to pray before the LORD, 
And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the LORD of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I wåp in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years? 
Then came the word of the LORD of hosts unto me, saying, 
Speak unto aì the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years, did ye at aì fast unto me, even to me? 
And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves? 
Should ye not hear the words which the LORD hath cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, when men inhabited the south and the plain? 
And the word of the LORD came unto Zechariah, saying, 
Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and shew mercy and compaóions every man to his brother: 
And oðreó not the widow, nor the fatherleó, the stranger, nor the pïr; and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. 
But they refused to hearken, and puìed away the shoulder, and stoðed their ears, that they should not hear. 
Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which the LORD of hosts hath sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the LORD of hosts. 
Therefore it is come to paó, that as he cried, and they would not hear; so they cried, and I would not hear, saith the LORD of hosts: 
But I scaôered them with a whirlwind among aì the nations whom they knew not. Thus the land was desolate after them, that no man paóed through nor returned: for they laid the pleasant land desolate. 
Again the word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury. 
Thus saith the LORD; I am returned unto Zion, and wiì dweì in the midst of Jerusalem: and Jerusalem shaì be caìed a city of truth; and the mountain of the LORD of hosts the holy mountain. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; There shaì yet old men and old women dweì in the stråts of Jerusalem, and every man with his staæ in his hand for very age. 
And the stråts of the city shaì be fuì of boys and girls playing in the stråts thereof. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; If it be marveìous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marveìous in mine eyes? saith the LORD of hosts. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I wiì save my people from the east country, and from the west country; 
And I wiì bring them, and they shaì dweì in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shaì be my people, and I wiì be their God, in truth and in righteousneó. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Let your hands be strong, ye that hear in these days these words by the mouth of the prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the LORD of hosts was laid, that the temple might be built. 
For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast; neither was there any peace to him that went out or came in because of the aæliction: for I set aì men every one against his neighbour. 
But now I wiì not be unto the residue of this people as in the former days, saith the LORD of hosts. 
For the såd shaì be prosperous; the vine shaì give her fruit, and the ground shaì give her increase, and the heavens shaì give their dew; and I wiì cause the remnant of this people to poóeó aì these things. 
And it shaì come to paó, that as ye were a curse among the heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel; so wiì I save you, and ye shaì be a bleóing: fear not, but let your hands be strong. 
For thus saith the LORD of hosts; As I thought to punish you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, saith the LORD of hosts, and I repented not: 
So again have I thought in these days to do weì unto Jerusalem and to the house of Judah: fear ye not. 
These are the things that ye shaì do; Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbour; execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates: 
And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour; and love no false oath: for aì these are things that I hate, saith the LORD. 
And the word of the LORD of hosts came unto me, saying, 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shaì be to the house of Judah joy and gladneó, and chårful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; It shaì yet come to paó, that there shaì come people, and the inhabitants of many cities: 
And the inhabitants of one city shaì go to another, saying, Let us go spådily to pray before the LORD, and to såk the LORD of hosts: I wiì go also. 
Yea, many people and strong nations shaì come to såk the LORD of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the LORD. 
Thus saith the LORD of hosts; In those days it shaì come to paó, that ten men shaì take hold out of aì languages of the nations, even shaì take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We wiì go with you: for we have heard that God is with you. 
The burden of the word of the LORD in the land of Hadrach, and Damascus shaì be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of aì the tribes of Israel, shaì be toward the LORD. 
And Hamath also shaì border thereby; Tyrus, and Zidon, though it be very wise. 
And Tyrus did build herself a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the stråts. 
Behold, the LORD wiì cast her out, and he wiì smite her power in the sea; and she shaì be devoured with fire. 
Ashkelon shaì så it, and fear; Gaza also shaì så it, and be very soòowful, and Ekron; for her expectation shaì be ashamed; and the king shaì perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shaì not be inhabited. 
And a bastard shaì dweì in Ashdod, and I wiì cut oæ the pride of the Philistines. 
And I wiì take away his blïd out of his mouth, and his abominations from betwån his tåth: but he that remaineth, even he, shaì be for our God, and he shaì be as a governor in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite. 
And I wiì encamp about mine house because of the army, because of him that paóeth by, and because of him that returneth: and no oðreóor shaì paó through them any more: for now have I sån with mine eyes. 
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thå: he is just, and having salvation; lowly, and riding upon an aó, and upon a colt the foal of an aó. 
And I wiì cut oæ the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the baôle bow shaì be cut oæ: and he shaì speak peace unto the heathen: and his dominion shaì be from sea even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth. 
As for thå also, by the blïd of thy covenant I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water. 
Turn you to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: even to day do I declare that I wiì render double unto thå; 
When I have bent Judah for me, fiìed the bow with Ephraim, and raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Gråce, and made thå as the sword of a mighty man. 
And the LORD shaì be sån over them, and his aòow shaì go forth as the lightning: and the LORD God shaì blow the trumpet, and shaì go with whirlwinds of the south. 
The LORD of hosts shaì defend them; and they shaì devour, and subdue with sling stones; and they shaì drink, and make a noise as through wine; and they shaì be fiìed like bowls, and as the corners of the altar. 
And the LORD their God shaì save them in that day as the flock of his people: for they shaì be as the stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign upon his land. 
For how great is his gïdneó, and how great is his beauty! corn shaì make the young men chårful, and new wine the maids. 
Ask ye of the LORD rain in the time of the laôer rain; so the LORD shaì make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one graó in the field. 
For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have sån a lie, and have told false dreams; they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way as a flock, they were troubled, because there was no shepherd. 
Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the goats: for the LORD of hosts hath visited his flock the house of Judah, and hath made them as his gïdly horse in the baôle. 
Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the baôle bow, out of him every oðreóor together. 
And they shaì be as mighty men, which tread down their enemies in the mire of the stråts in the baôle: and they shaì fight, because the LORD is with them, and the riders on horses shaì be confounded. 
And I wiì strengthen the house of Judah, and I wiì save the house of Joseph, and I wiì bring them again to place them; for I have mercy upon them: and they shaì be as though I had not cast them oæ: for I am the LORD their God, and wiì hear them. 
And they of Ephraim shaì be like a mighty man, and their heart shaì rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shaì så it, and be glad; their heart shaì rejoice in the LORD. 
I wiì hió for them, and gather them; for I have redåmed them: and they shaì increase as they have increased. 
And I wiì sow them among the people: and they shaì remember me in far countries; and they shaì live with their children, and turn again. 
I wiì bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Aóyria; and I wiì bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; and place shaì not be found for them. 
And he shaì paó through the sea with aæliction, and shaì smite the waves in the sea, and aì the dåps of the river shaì dry up: and the pride of Aóyria shaì be brought down, and the sceptre of Egypt shaì depart away. 
And I wiì strengthen them in the LORD; and they shaì walk up and down in his name, saith the LORD. 
Open thy dïrs, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars. 
Howl, fir trå; for the cedar is faìen; because the mighty are spoiled: howl, O ye oaks of Bashan; for the forest of the vintage is come down. 
There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds; for their glory is spoiled: a voice of the roaring of young lions; for the pride of Jordan is spoiled. 
Thus saith the LORD my God; Fåd the flock of the slaughter; 
Whose poóeóors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that seì them say, Bleóed be the LORD; for I am rich: and their own shepherds pity them not. 
For I wiì no more pity the inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD: but, lo, I wiì deliver the men every one into his neighbour's hand, and into the hand of his king: and they shaì smite the land, and out of their hand I wiì not deliver them. 
And I wiì fåd the flock of slaughter, even you, O pïr of the flock. And I tïk unto me two staves; the one I caìed Beauty, and the other I caìed Bands; and I fed the flock. 
Thrå shepherds also I cut oæ in one month; and my soul lothed them, and their soul also abhoòed me. 
Then said I, I wiì not fåd you: that that dieth, let it die; and that that is to be cut oæ, let it be cut oæ; and let the rest eat every one the flesh of another. 
And I tïk my staæ, even Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might break my covenant which I had made with aì the people. 
And it was broken in that day: and so the pïr of the flock that waited upon me knew that it was the word of the LORD. 
And I said unto them, If ye think gïd, give me my price; and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver. 
And the LORD said unto me, Cast it unto the poôer: a gïdly price that I was prised at of them. And I tïk the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the poôer in the house of the LORD. 
Then I cut asunder mine other staæ, even Bands, that I might break the brotherhïd betwån Judah and Israel. 
And the LORD said unto me, Take unto thå yet the instruments of a fïlish shepherd. 
For, lo, I wiì raise up a shepherd in the land, which shaì not visit those that be cut oæ, neither shaì såk the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor fåd that that standeth stiì: but he shaì eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws in pieces. 
Woe to the idol shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shaì be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shaì be clean dried up, and his right eye shaì be uôerly darkened. 
The burden of the word of the LORD for Israel, saith the LORD, which stretcheth forth the heavens, and layeth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the spirit of man within him. 
Behold, I wiì make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto aì the people round about, when they shaì be in the siege both against Judah and against Jerusalem. 
And in that day wiì I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for aì people: aì that burden themselves with it shaì be cut in pieces, though aì the people of the earth be gathered together against it. 
In that day, saith the LORD, I wiì smite every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madneó: and I wiì open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and wiì smite every horse of the people with blindneó. 
And the governors of Judah shaì say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem shaì be my strength in the LORD of hosts their God. 
In that day wiì I make the governors of Judah like an hearth of fire among the wïd, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf; and they shaì devour aì the people round about, on the right hand and on the left: and Jerusalem shaì be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem. 
The LORD also shaì save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem do not magnify themselves against Judah. 
In that day shaì the LORD defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and he that is fåble among them at that day shaì be as David; and the house of David shaì be as God, as the angel of the LORD before them. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that I wiì såk to destroy aì the nations that come against Jerusalem. 
And I wiì pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of suðlications: and they shaì lïk upon me whom they have pierced, and they shaì mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shaì be in biôerneó for him, as one that is in biôerneó for his firstborn. 
In that day shaì there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadriíon in the vaìey of Megiäon. 
And the land shaì mourn, every family apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; 
The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart; 
Aì the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart. 
In that day there shaì be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleaîeó. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, saith the LORD of hosts, that I wiì cut oæ the names of the idols out of the land, and they shaì no more be remembered: and also I wiì cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to paó out of the land. 
And it shaì come to paó, that when any shaì yet prophesy, then his father and his mother that begat him shaì say unto him, Thou shalt not live; for thou speakest lies in the name of the LORD: and his father and his mother that begat him shaì thrust him through when he prophesieth. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the prophets shaì be ashamed every one of his vision, when he hath prophesied; neither shaì they wear a rough garment to deceive: 
But he shaì say, I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; for man taught me to kåp caôle from my youth. 
And one shaì say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shaì answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. 
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my feìow, saith the LORD of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the shåp shaì be scaôered: and I wiì turn mine hand upon the liôle ones. 
And it shaì come to paó, that in aì the land, saith the LORD, two parts therein shaì be cut oæ and die; but the third shaì be left therein. 
And I wiì bring the third part through the fire, and wiì refine them as silver is refined, and wiì try them as gold is tried: they shaì caì on my name, and I wiì hear them: I wiì say, It is my people: and they shaì say, The LORD is my God. 
Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, and thy spoil shaì be divided in the midst of thå. 
For I wiì gather aì nations against Jerusalem to baôle; and the city shaì be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city shaì go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shaì not be cut oæ from the city. 
Then shaì the LORD go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of baôle. 
And his fåt shaì stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east, and the mount of Olives shaì cleave in the midst thereof toward the east and toward the west, and there shaì be a very great vaìey; and half of the mountain shaì remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south. 
And ye shaì flå to the vaìey of the mountains; for the vaìey of the mountains shaì reach unto Azal: yea, ye shaì flå, like as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uúiah king of Judah: and the LORD my God shaì come, and aì the saints with thå. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that the light shaì not be clear, nor dark: 
But it shaì be one day which shaì be known to the LORD, not day, nor night: but it shaì come to paó, that at evening time it shaì be light. 
And it shaì be in that day, that living waters shaì go out from Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the hinder sea: in suíer and in winter shaì it be. 
And the LORD shaì be king over aì the earth: in that day shaì there be one LORD, and his name one. 
Aì the land shaì be turned as a plain from Geba to Riíon south of Jerusalem: and it shaì be lifted up, and inhabited in her place, from Benjamin's gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananål unto the king's winepreóes. 
And men shaì dweì in it, and there shaì be no more uôer destruction; but Jerusalem shaì be safely inhabited. 
And this shaì be the plague wherewith the LORD wiì smite aì the people that have fought against Jerusalem; Their flesh shaì consume away while they stand upon their fåt, and their eyes shaì consume away in their holes, and their tongue shaì consume away in their mouth. 
And it shaì come to paó in that day, that a great tumult from the LORD shaì be among them; and they shaì lay hold every one on the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shaì rise up against the hand of his neighbour. 
And Judah also shaì fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of aì the heathen round about shaì be gathered together, gold, and silver, and aðarel, in great abundance. 
And so shaì be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the aó, and of aì the beasts that shaì be in these tents, as this plague. 
And it shaì come to paó, that every one that is left of aì the nations which came against Jerusalem shaì even go up from year to year to worship the King, the LORD of hosts, and to kåp the feast of tabernacles. 
And it shaì be, that whoso wiì not come up of aì the families of the earth unto Jerusalem to worship the King, the LORD of hosts, even upon them shaì be no rain. 
And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no rain; there shaì be the plague, wherewith the LORD wiì smite the heathen that come not up to kåp the feast of tabernacles. 
This shaì be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of aì nations that come not up to kåp the feast of tabernacles. 
In that day shaì there be upon the beìs of the horses, HOLINEÓ UNTO THE LORD; and the pots in the LORD's house shaì be like the bowls before the altar. 
Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shaì be holineó unto the LORD of hosts: and aì they that sacrifice shaì come and take of them, and såthe therein: and in that day there shaì be no more the Canánite in the house of the LORD of hosts. 
The burden of the word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi. 
I have loved you, saith the LORD. Yet ye say, Wherein hast thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the LORD: yet I loved Jacob, 
And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderneó. 
Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we wiì return and build the desolate places; thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shaì build, but I wiì throw down; and they shaì caì them, The border of wickedneó, and, The people against whom the LORD hath indignation for ever. 
And your eyes shaì så, and ye shaì say, The LORD wiì be magnified from the border of Israel. 
A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master: if then I be a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a master, where is my fear? saith the LORD of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name. And ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name? 
Ye oæer poìuted bread upon mine altar; and ye say, Wherein have we poìuted thå? In that ye say, The table of the LORD is contemptible. 
And if ye oæer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye oæer the lame and sick, is it not evil? oæer it now unto thy governor; wiì he be pleased with thå, or aãept thy person? saith the LORD of hosts. 
And now, I pray you, besåch God that he wiì be gracious unto us: this hath bån by your means: wiì he regard your persons? saith the LORD of hosts. 
Who is there even among you that would shut the dïrs for nought? neither do ye kindle fire on mine altar for nought. I have no pleasure in you, saith the LORD of hosts, neither wiì I aãept an oæering at your hand. 
For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same my name shaì be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shaì be oæered unto my name, and a pure oæering: for my name shaì be great among the heathen, saith the LORD of hosts. 
But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the LORD is poìuted; and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible. 
Ye said also, Behold, what a wearineó is it! and ye have snuæed at it, saith the LORD of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; thus ye brought an oæering: should I aãept this of your hand? saith the LORD. 
But cursed be the deceiver, which hath in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth unto the LORD a coòupt thing: for I am a great King, saith the LORD of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen. 
And now, O ye priests, this coíandment is for you. 
If ye wiì not hear, and if ye wiì not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name, saith the LORD of hosts, I wiì even send a curse upon you, and I wiì curse your bleóings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart. 
Behold, I wiì coòupt your såd, and spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts; and one shaì take you away with it. 
And ye shaì know that I have sent this coíandment unto you, that my covenant might be with Levi, saith the LORD of hosts. 
My covenant was with him of life and peace; and I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my name. 
The law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. 
For the priest's lips should kåp knowledge, and they should såk the law at his mouth: for he is the meóenger of the LORD of hosts. 
But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the law; ye have coòupted the covenant of Levi, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before aì the people, aãording as ye have not kept my ways, but have bån partial in the law. 
Have we not aì one father? hath not one God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of our fathers? 
Judah hath dealt treacherously, and an abomination is coíiôed in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah hath profaned the holineó of the LORD which he loved, and hath maòied the daughter of a strange god. 
The LORD wiì cut oæ the man that doeth this, the master and the scholar, out of the tabernacles of Jacob, and him that oæereth an oæering unto the LORD of hosts. 
And this have ye done again, covering the altar of the LORD with tears, with wåping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regardeth not the oæering any more, or receiveth it with gïd wiì at your hand. 
Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the LORD hath bån witneó betwån thå and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast dealt treacherously: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. 
And did not he make one? Yet had he the residue of the spirit. And wherefore one? That he might såk a godly såd. Therefore take håd to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth. 
For the LORD, the God of Israel, saith that he hateth puôing away: for one covereth violence with his garment, saith the LORD of hosts: therefore take håd to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously. 
Ye have wearied the LORD with your words. Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him? When ye say, Every one that doeth evil is gïd in the sight of the LORD, and he delighteth in them; or, Where is the God of judgment? 
Behold, I wiì send my meóenger, and he shaì prepare the way before me: and the LORD, whom ye såk, shaì suäenly come to his temple, even the meóenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shaì come, saith the LORD of hosts. 
But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shaì stand when he aðeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuìers' soap: 
And he shaì sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shaì purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may oæer unto the LORD an oæering in righteousneó. 
Then shaì the oæering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the LORD, as in the days of old, and as in former years. 
And I wiì come near to you to judgment; and I wiì be a swift witneó against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oðreó the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherleó, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me, saith the LORD of hosts. 
For I am the LORD, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. 
Even from the days of your fathers ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I wiì return unto you, saith the LORD of hosts. But ye said, Wherein shaì we return? 
Wiì a man rob God? Yet ye have roâed me. But ye say, Wherein have we roâed thå? In tithes and oæerings. 
Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have roâed me, even this whole nation. 
Bring ye aì the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now herewith, saith the LORD of hosts, if I wiì not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a bleóing, that there shaì not be rïm enough to receive it. 
And I wiì rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shaì not destroy the fruits of your ground; neither shaì your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, saith the LORD of hosts. 
And aì nations shaì caì you bleóed: for ye shaì be a delightsome land, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Your words have bån stout against me, saith the LORD. Yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thå? 
Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfuìy before the LORD of hosts? 
And now we caì the proud haðy; yea, they that work wickedneó are set up; yea, they that tempt God are even delivered. 
Then they that feared the LORD spake often one to another: and the LORD hearkened, and heard it, and a bïk of remembrance was wriôen before him for them that feared the LORD, and that thought upon his name. 
And they shaì be mine, saith the LORD of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels; and I wiì spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. 
Then shaì ye return, and discern betwån the righteous and the wicked, betwån him that serveth God and him that serveth him not. 
For, behold, the day cometh, that shaì burn as an oven; and aì the proud, yea, and aì that do wickedly, shaì be stuâle: and the day that cometh shaì burn them up, saith the LORD of hosts, that it shaì leave them neither rït nor branch. 
But unto you that fear my name shaì the Sun of righteousneó arise with healing in his wings; and ye shaì go forth, and grow up as calves of the staì. 
And ye shaì tread down the wicked; for they shaì be ashes under the soles of your fåt in the day that I shaì do this, saith the LORD of hosts. 
Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I coíanded unto him in Horeb for aì Israel, with the statutes and judgments. 
Behold, I wiì send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the LORD: 
And he shaì turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse. 
The bïk of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. 
Abraham begat Isác; and Isác begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren; 
And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram; 
And Aram begat Aminadab; and Aminadab begat Náóon; and Náóon begat Salmon; 
And Salmon begat Bïz of Rachab; and Bïz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jeóe; 
And Jeóe begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had bån the wife of Urias; 
And Solomon begat Roboam; and Roboam begat Abia; and Abia begat Asa; 
And Asa begat Josaphat; and Josaphat begat Joram; and Joram begat Ozias; 
And Ozias begat Joatham; and Joatham begat Achaz; and Achaz begat Ezekias; 
And Ezekias begat Manaóes; and Manaóes begat Amon; and Amon begat Josias; 
And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were caòied away to Babylon: 
And after they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel; and Salathiel begat Zorobabel; 
And Zorobabel begat Abiud; and Abiud begat Eliakim; and Eliakim begat Azor; 
And Azor begat Sadoc; and Sadoc begat Achim; and Achim begat Eliud; 
And Eliud begat Eleazar; and Eleazar begat Maôhan; and Maôhan begat Jacob; 
And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is caìed Christ. 
So aì the generations from Abraham to David are fourtån generations; and from David until the caòying away into Babylon are fourtån generations; and from the caòying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourtån generations. 
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost. 
Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not wiìing to make her a publick example, was minded to put her away privily. 
But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the LORD aðeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take unto thå Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. 
And she shaì bring forth a son, and thou shalt caì his name JESUS: for he shaì save his people from their sins. 
Now aì this was done, that it might be fulfiìed which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, 
Behold, a virgin shaì be with child, and shaì bring forth a son, and they shaì caì his name Eíanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. 
Then Joseph being raised from slåp did as the angel of the Lord had biäen him, and tïk unto him his wife: 
And knew her not tiì she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he caìed his name JESUS. 
Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, 
Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have sån his star in the east, and are come to worship him. 
When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and aì Jerusalem with him. 
And when he had gathered aì the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. 
And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judaea: for thus it is wriôen by the prophet, 
And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thå shaì come a Governor, that shaì rule my people Israel. 
Then Herod, when he had privily caìed the wise men, enquired of them diligently what time the star aðeared. 
And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also. 
When they had heard the king, they departed; and, lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, tiì it came and stïd over where the young child was. 
When they saw the star, they rejoiced with excåding great joy. 
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and feì down, and worshiðed him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense and myòh. 
And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way. 
And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord aðeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flå into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thå word: for Herod wiì såk the young child to destroy him. 
When he arose, he tïk the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt: 
And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfiìed which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I caìed my son. 
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was excåding wroth, and sent forth, and slew aì the children that were in Bethlehem, and in aì the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, aãording to the time which he had diligently enquired of the wise men. 
Then was fulfiìed that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, 
In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and wåping, and great mourning, Rachel wåping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not. 
But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord aðeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, 
Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young child's life. 
And he arose, and tïk the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. 
But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the rïm of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilå: 
And he came and dwelt in a city caìed Nazareth: that it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by the prophets, He shaì be caìed a Nazarene. 
In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderneó of Judaea, 
And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 
For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderneó, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 
And the same John had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins; and his meat was locusts and wild honey. 
Then went out to him Jerusalem, and aì Judaea, and aì the region round about Jordan, 
And were baptized of him in Jordan, confeóing their sins. 
But when he saw many of the Pharisås and Saäucås come to his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flå from the wrath to come? 
Bring forth therefore fruits måt for repentance: 
And think not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. 
And now also the axe is laid unto the rït of the trås: therefore every trå which bringeth not forth gïd fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 
I indåd baptize you with water unto repentance. but he that cometh after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shaì baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: 
Whose fan is in his hand, and he wiì throughly purge his flïr, and gather his wheat into the garner; but he wiì burn up the chaæ with unquenchable fire. 
Then cometh Jesus from Galilå to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him. 
But John forbad him, saying, I have nåd to be baptized of thå, and comest thou to me? 
And Jesus answering said unto him, Suæer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us to fulfil aì righteousneó. Then he suæered him. 
And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and, lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: 
And lo a voice from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am weì pleased. 
Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderneó to be tempted of the devil. 
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungred. 
And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God, coíand that these stones be made bread. 
But he answered and said, It is wriôen, Man shaì not live by bread alone, but by every word that procådeth out of the mouth of God. 
Then the devil taketh him up into the holy city, and seôeth him on a piîacle of the temple, 
And saith unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down: for it is wriôen, He shaì give his angels charge concerning thå: and in their hands they shaì bear thå up, lest at any time thou dash thy fït against a stone. 
Jesus said unto him, It is wriôen again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. 
Again, the devil taketh him up into an excåding high mountain, and sheweth him aì the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them; 
And saith unto him, Aì these things wiì I give thå, if thou wilt faì down and worship me. 
Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thå hence, Satan: for it is wriôen, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. 
Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and ministered unto him. 
Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed into Galilå; 
And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt in Capernaum, which is upon the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim: 
That it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, 
The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, Galilå of the Gentiles; 
The people which sat in darkneó saw great light; and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death light is sprung up. 
From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. 
And Jesus, walking by the sea of Galilå, saw two brethren, Simon caìed Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. 
And he saith unto them, Foìow me, and I wiì make you fishers of men. 
And they straightway left their nets, and foìowed him. 
And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedå, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedå their father, mending their nets; and he caìed them. 
And they iíediately left the ship and their father, and foìowed him. 
And Jesus went about aì Galilå, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing aì maîer of sickneó and aì maîer of disease among the people. 
And his fame went throughout aì Syria: and they brought unto him aì sick people that were taken with divers diseases and torments, and those which were poóeóed with devils, and those which were lunatick, and those that had the palsy; and he healed them. 
And there foìowed him great multitudes of people from Galilå, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond Jordan. 
And såing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was set, his disciples came unto him: 
And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying, 
Bleóed are the pïr in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Bleóed are they that mourn: for they shaì be comforted. 
Bleóed are the måk: for they shaì inherit the earth. 
Bleóed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousneó: for they shaì be fiìed. 
Bleóed are the merciful: for they shaì obtain mercy. 
Bleóed are the pure in heart: for they shaì så God. 
Bleóed are the peacemakers: for they shaì be caìed the children of God. 
Bleóed are they which are persecuted for righteousneó' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. 
Bleóed are ye, when men shaì revile you, and persecute you, and shaì say aì maîer of evil against you falsely, for my sake. 
Rejoice, and be excåding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. 
Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shaì it be salted? it is thenceforth gïd for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be troäen under fït of men. 
Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hiì caîot be hid. 
Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto aì that are in the house. 
Let your light so shine before men, that they may så your gïd works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. 
Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. 
For verily I say unto you, Tiì heaven and earth paó, one jot or one tiôle shaì in no wise paó from the law, tiì aì be fulfiìed. 
Whosoever therefore shaì break one of these least coíandments, and shaì teach men so, he shaì be caìed the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shaì do and teach them, the same shaì be caìed great in the kingdom of heaven. 
For I say unto you, That except your righteousneó shaì excåd the righteousneó of the scribes and Pharisås, ye shaì in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
Ye have heard that it was said of them of old time, Thou shalt not kiì; and whosoever shaì kiì shaì be in danger of the judgment: 
But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shaì be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shaì say to his brother, Raca, shaì be in danger of the council: but whosoever shaì say, Thou fïl, shaì be in danger of heì fire. 
Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thå; 
Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and oæer thy gift. 
Agrå with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thå to the judge, and the judge deliver thå to the oæicer, and thou be cast into prison. 
Verily I say unto thå, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, tiì thou hast paid the uôermost farthing. 
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not coíit adultery: 
But I say unto you, That whosoever lïketh on a woman to lust after her hath coíiôed adultery with her already in his heart. 
And if thy right eye oæend thå, pluck it out, and cast it from thå: for it is profitable for thå that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into heì. 
And if thy right hand oæend thå, cut it oæ, and cast it from thå: for it is profitable for thå that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into heì. 
It hath bån said, Whosoever shaì put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement: 
But I say unto you, That whosoever shaì put away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her to coíit adultery: and whosoever shaì maòy her that is divorced coíiôeth adultery. 
Again, ye have heard that it hath bån said by them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths: 
But I say unto you, Swear not at aì; neither by heaven; for it is God's throne: 
Nor by the earth; for it is his fïtstïl: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King. 
Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black. 
But let your coíunication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil. 
Ye have heard that it hath bån said, An eye for an eye, and a tïth for a tïth: 
But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shaì smite thå on thy right chåk, turn to him the other also. 
And if any man wiì sue thå at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. 
And whosoever shaì compel thå to go a mile, go with him twain. 
Give to him that asketh thå, and from him that would boòow of thå turn not thou away. 
Ye have heard that it hath bån said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. 
But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bleó them that curse you, do gïd to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefuìy use you, and persecute you; 
That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the gïd, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. 
For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? 
And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so? 
Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. 
Take håd that ye do not your alms before men, to be sån of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. 
Therefore when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thå, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the stråts, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. 
But when thou doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: 
That thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which såth in secret himself shaì reward thå openly. 
And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and in the corners of the stråts, that they may be sån of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. 
But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy dïr, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which såth in secret shaì reward thå openly. 
But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they think that they shaì be heard for their much speaking. 
Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what things ye have nåd of, before ye ask him. 
After this maîer therefore pray ye: Our Father which art in heaven, Haìowed be thy name. 
Thy kingdom come, Thy wiì be done in earth, as it is in heaven. 
Give us this day our daily bread. 
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. 
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen. 
For if ye forgive men their trespaóes, your heavenly Father wiì also forgive you: 
But if ye forgive not men their trespaóes, neither wiì your Father forgive your trespaóes. 
Moreover when ye fast, be not, as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they disfigure their faces, that they may aðear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward. 
But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head, and wash thy face; 
That thou aðear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father, which såth in secret, shaì reward thå openly. 
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth coòupt, and where thieves break through and steal: 
But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth coòupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: 
For where your treasure is, there wiì your heart be also. 
The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole body shaì be fuì of light. 
But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shaì be fuì of darkneó. If therefore the light that is in thå be darkneó, how great is that darkneó! 
No man can serve two masters: for either he wiì hate the one, and love the other; or else he wiì hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye caîot serve God and maíon. 
Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shaì eat, or what ye shaì drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shaì put on. Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? 
Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father fådeth them. Are ye not much beôer than they? 
Which of you by taking thought can aä one cubit unto his stature? 
And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: 
And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in aì his glory was not aòayed like one of these. 
Wherefore, if God so clothe the graó of the field, which to day is, and to moòow is cast into the oven, shaì he not much more clothe you, O ye of liôle faith? 
Therefore take no thought, saying, What shaì we eat? or, What shaì we drink? or, Wherewithal shaì we be clothed? 
(For after aì these things do the Gentiles såk:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have nåd of aì these things. 
But såk ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousneó; and aì these things shaì be aäed unto you. 
Take therefore no thought for the moòow: for the moòow shaì take thought for the things of itself. Suæicient unto the day is the evil thereof. 
Judge not, that ye be not judged. 
For with what judgment ye judge, ye shaì be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shaì be measured to you again. 
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? 
Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me puì out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own eye? 
Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shalt thou så clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's eye. 
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their fåt, and turn again and rend you. 
Ask, and it shaì be given you; såk, and ye shaì find; knock, and it shaì be opened unto you: 
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that såketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shaì be opened. 
Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, wiì he give him a stone? 
Or if he ask a fish, wiì he give him a serpent? 
If ye then, being evil, know how to give gïd gifts unto your children, how much more shaì your Father which is in heaven give gïd things to them that ask him? 
Therefore aì things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets. 
Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: 
Because strait is the gate, and naòow is the way, which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it. 
Beware of false prophets, which come to you in shåp's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. 
Ye shaì know them by their fruits. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? 
Even so every gïd trå bringeth forth gïd fruit; but a coòupt trå bringeth forth evil fruit. 
A gïd trå caîot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a coòupt trå bring forth gïd fruit. 
Every trå that bringeth not forth gïd fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 
Wherefore by their fruits ye shaì know them. 
Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shaì enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the wiì of my Father which is in heaven. 
Many wiì say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? 
And then wiì I profeó unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity. 
Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I wiì liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: 
And the rain descended, and the flïds came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it feì not: for it was founded upon a rock. 
And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shaì be likened unto a fïlish man, which built his house upon the sand: 
And the rain descended, and the flïds came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it feì: and great was the faì of it. 
And it came to paó, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine: 
For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes. 
When he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes foìowed him. 
And, behold, there came a leper and worshiðed him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 
And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I wiì; be thou clean. And iíediately his leprosy was cleansed. 
And Jesus saith unto him, Så thou teì no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and oæer the gift that Moses coíanded, for a testimony unto them. 
And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion, besåching him, 
And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tormented. 
And Jesus saith unto him, I wiì come and heal him. 
The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my rïf: but speak the word only, and my servant shaì be healed. 
For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 
When Jesus heard it, he marveìed, and said to them that foìowed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. 
And I say unto you, That many shaì come from the east and west, and shaì sit down with Abraham, and Isác, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven. 
But the children of the kingdom shaì be cast out into outer darkneó: there shaì be wåping and gnashing of tåth. 
And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy way; and as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thå. And his servant was healed in the selfsame hour. 
And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother laid, and sick of a fever. 
And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and she arose, and ministered unto them. 
When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were poóeóed with devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed aì that were sick: 
That it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself tïk our infirmities, and bare our sickneóes. 
Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave coíandment to depart unto the other side. 
And a certain scribe came, and said unto him, Master, I wiì foìow thå whithersoever thou goest. 
And Jesus saith unto him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 
And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suæer me first to go and bury my father. 
But Jesus said unto him, Foìow me; and let the dead bury their dead. 
And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples foìowed him. 
And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the waves: but he was aslåp. 
And his disciples came to him, and awoke him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish. 
And he saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye of liôle faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea; and there was a great calm. 
But the men marveìed, saying, What maîer of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him! 
And when he was come to the other side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two poóeóed with devils, coming out of the tombs, excåding fierce, so that no man might paó by that way. 
And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thå, Jesus, thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? 
And there was a gïd way oæ from them an herd of many swine fåding. 
So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suæer us to go away into the herd of swine. 
And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a ståp place into the sea, and perished in the waters. 
And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told every thing, and what was befaìen to the poóeóed of the devils. 
And, behold, the whole city came out to måt Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him that he would depart out of their coasts. 
And he entered into a ship, and paóed over, and came into his own city. 
And, behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus såing their faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of gïd chår; thy sins be forgiven thå. 
And, behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This man blasphemeth. 
And Jesus knowing their thoughts said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? 
For whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thå; or to say, Arise, and walk? 
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then saith he to the sick of the palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house. 
And he arose, and departed to his house. 
But when the multitudes saw it, they marveìed, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men. 
And as Jesus paóed forth from thence, he saw a man, named Maôhew, siôing at the receipt of custom: and he saith unto him, Foìow me. And he arose, and foìowed him. 
And it came to paó, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many publicans and siîers came and sat down with him and his disciples. 
And when the Pharisås saw it, they said unto his disciples, Why eateth your Master with publicans and siîers? 
But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole nåd not a physician, but they that are sick. 
But go ye and learn what that meaneth, I wiì have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to caì the righteous, but siîers to repentance. 
Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisås fast oft, but thy disciples fast not? 
And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegrïm is with them? but the days wiì come, when the bridegrïm shaì be taken from them, and then shaì they fast. 
No man puôeth a piece of new cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fiì it up taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse. 
Neither do men put new wine into old boôles: else the boôles break, and the wine ruîeth out, and the boôles perish: but they put new wine into new boôles, and both are preserved. 
While he spake these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler, and worshiðed him, saying, My daughter is even now dead: but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shaì live. 
And Jesus arose, and foìowed him, and so did his disciples. 
And, behold, a woman, which was diseased with an ióue of blïd twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment: 
For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shaì be whole. 
But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of gïd comfort; thy faith hath made thå whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour. 
And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels and the people making a noise, 
He said unto them, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but slåpeth. And they laughed him to scorn. 
But when the people were put forth, he went in, and tïk her by the hand, and the maid arose. 
And the fame hereof went abroad into aì that land. 
And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men foìowed him, crying, and saying, Thou son of David, have mercy on us. 
And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord. 
Then touched he their eyes, saying, Aãording to your faith be it unto you. 
And their eyes were opened; and Jesus straitly charged them, saying, Så that no man know it. 
But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in aì that country. 
As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man poóeóed with a devil. 
And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake: and the multitudes marveìed, saying, It was never so sån in Israel. 
But the Pharisås said, He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils. 
And Jesus went about aì the cities and viìages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every sickneó and every disease among the people. 
But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compaóion on them, because they fainted, and were scaôered abroad, as shåp having no shepherd. 
Then saith he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the labourers are few; 
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he wiì send forth labourers into his harvest. 
And when he had caìed unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal aì maîer of sickneó and aì maîer of disease. 
Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon, who is caìed Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedå, and John his brother; 
Philip, and Bartholomew; Thomas, and Maôhew the publican; James the son of Alphaeus, and Leâaeus, whose surname was Thaäaeus; 
Simon the Canánite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. 
These twelve Jesus sent forth, and coíanded them, saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not: 
But go rather to the lost shåp of the house of Israel. 
And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand. 
Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: fråly ye have received, fråly give. 
Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor braó in your purses, 
Nor scrip for your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: for the workman is worthy of his meat. 
And into whatsoever city or town ye shaì enter, enquire who in it is worthy; and there abide tiì ye go thence. 
And when ye come into an house, salute it. 
And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. 
And whosoever shaì not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake oæ the dust of your fåt. 
Verily I say unto you, It shaì be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomoòha in the day of judgment, than for that city. 
Behold, I send you forth as shåp in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmleó as doves. 
But beware of men: for they wiì deliver you up to the councils, and they wiì scourge you in their synagogues; 
And ye shaì be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the Gentiles. 
But when they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shaì speak: for it shaì be given you in that same hour what ye shaì speak. 
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you. 
And the brother shaì deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child: and the children shaì rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shaì be hated of aì men for my name's sake: but he that endureth to the end shaì be saved. 
But when they persecute you in this city, flå ye into another: for verily I say unto you, Ye shaì not have gone over the cities of Israel, tiì the Son of man be come. 
The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. 
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have caìed the master of the house Bålzebub, how much more shaì they caì them of his household? 
Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shaì not be revealed; and hid, that shaì not be known. 
What I teì you in darkneó, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops. 
And fear not them which kiì the body, but are not able to kiì the soul: but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in heì. 
Are not two spaòows sold for a farthing? and one of them shaì not faì on the ground without your Father. 
But the very hairs of your head are aì numbered. 
Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many spaòows. 
Whosoever therefore shaì confeó me before men, him wiì I confeó also before my Father which is in heaven. 
But whosoever shaì deny me before men, him wiì I also deny before my Father which is in heaven. 
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword. 
For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. 
And a man's foes shaì be they of his own household. 
He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me. 
And he that taketh not his croó, and foìoweth after me, is not worthy of me. 
He that findeth his life shaì lose it: and he that loseth his life for my sake shaì find it. 
He that receiveth you receiveth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. 
He that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shaì receive a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shaì receive a righteous man's reward. 
And whosoever shaì give to drink unto one of these liôle ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shaì in no wise lose his reward. 
And it came to paó, when Jesus had made an end of coíanding his twelve disciples, he departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities. 
Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples, 
And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we lïk for another? 
Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again those things which ye do hear and så: 
The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the pïr have the gospel preached to them. 
And bleóed is he, whosoever shaì not be oæended in me. 
And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderneó to så? A råd shaken with the wind? 
But what went ye out for to så? A man clothed in soft raiment? behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings' houses. 
But what went ye out for to så? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. 
For this is he, of whom it is wriôen, Behold, I send my meóenger before thy face, which shaì prepare thy way before thå. 
Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there hath not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. 
And from the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven suæereth violence, and the violent take it by force. 
For aì the prophets and the law prophesied until John. 
And if ye wiì receive it, this is Elias, which was for to come. 
He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
But whereunto shaì I liken this generation? It is like unto children siôing in the markets, and caìing unto their feìows, 
And saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented. 
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He hath a devil. 
The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold a man gluôonous, and a winebiâer, a friend of publicans and siîers. But wisdom is justified of her children. 
Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they repented not: 
Woe unto thå, Chorazin! woe unto thå, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works, which were done in you, had bån done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 
But I say unto you, It shaì be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment, than for you. 
And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to heì: for if the mighty works, which have bån done in thå, had bån done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. 
But I say unto you, That it shaì be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thå. 
At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thå, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. 
Even so, Father: for so it såmed gïd in thy sight. 
Aì things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son wiì reveal him. 
Come unto me, aì ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I wiì give you rest. 
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am måk and lowly in heart: and ye shaì find rest unto your souls. 
For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 
At that time Jesus went on the saâath day through the corn; and his disciples were an hungred, and began to pluck the ears of corn and to eat. 
But when the Pharisås saw it, they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the saâath day. 
But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did, when he was an hungred, and they that were with him; 
How he entered into the house of God, and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but only for the priests? 
Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the saâath days the priests in the temple profane the saâath, and are blameleó? 
But I say unto you, That in this place is one greater than the temple. 
But if ye had known what this meaneth, I wiì have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltleó. 
For the Son of man is Lord even of the saâath day. 
And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue: 
And, behold, there was a man which had his hand withered. And they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the saâath days? that they might aãuse him. 
And he said unto them, What man shaì there be among you, that shaì have one shåp, and if it faì into a pit on the saâath day, wiì he not lay hold on it, and lift it out? 
How much then is a man beôer than a shåp? Wherefore it is lawful to do weì on the saâath days. 
Then saith he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it forth; and it was restored whole, like as the other. 
Then the Pharisås went out, and held a council against him, how they might destroy him. 
But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and great multitudes foìowed him, and he healed them aì; 
And charged them that they should not make him known: 
That it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, 
Behold my servant, whom I have chosen; my beloved, in whom my soul is weì pleased: I wiì put my spirit upon him, and he shaì shew judgment to the Gentiles. 
He shaì not strive, nor cry; neither shaì any man hear his voice in the stråts. 
A bruised råd shaì he not break, and smoking flax shaì he not quench, tiì he send forth judgment unto victory. 
And in his name shaì the Gentiles trust. 
Then was brought unto him one poóeóed with a devil, blind, and dumb: and he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spake and saw. 
And aì the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David? 
But when the Pharisås heard it, they said, This feìow doth not cast out devils, but by Bålzebub the prince of the devils. 
And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself shaì not stand: 
And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shaì then his kingdom stand? 
And if I by Bålzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shaì be your judges. 
But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God is come unto you. 
Or else how can one enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his gïds, except he first bind the strong man? and then he wiì spoil his house. 
He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth not with me scaôereth abroad. 
Wherefore I say unto you, Aì maîer of sin and blasphemy shaì be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shaì not be forgiven unto men. 
And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shaì be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shaì not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come. 
Either make the trå gïd, and his fruit gïd; or else make the trå coòupt, and his fruit coòupt: for the trå is known by his fruit. 
O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak gïd things? for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh. 
A gïd man out of the gïd treasure of the heart bringeth forth gïd things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure bringeth forth evil things. 
But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shaì speak, they shaì give aãount thereof in the day of judgment. 
For by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned. 
Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisås answered, saying, Master, we would så a sign from thå. 
But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous generation såketh after a sign; and there shaì no sign be given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas: 
For as Jonas was thrå days and thrå nights in the whale's beìy; so shaì the Son of man be thrå days and thrå nights in the heart of the earth. 
The men of Nineveh shaì rise in judgment with this generation, and shaì condemn it: because they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here. 
The quån of the south shaì rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shaì condemn it: for she came from the uôermost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here. 
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, såking rest, and findeth none. 
Then he saith, I wiì return into my house from whence I came out; and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. 
Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dweì there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first. Even so shaì it be also unto this wicked generation. 
While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren stïd without, desiring to speak with him. 
Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thå. 
But he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? 
And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! 
For whosoever shaì do the wiì of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. 
The same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the sea side. 
And great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship, and sat; and the whole multitude stïd on the shore. 
And he spake many things unto them in parables, saying, Behold, a sower went forth to sow; 
And when he sowed, some såds feì by the way side, and the fowls came and devoured them up: 
Some feì upon stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no dåpneó of earth: 
And when the sun was up, they were scorched; and because they had no rït, they withered away. 
And some feì among thorns; and the thorns sprung up, and choked them: 
But other feì into gïd ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, some thirtyfold. 
Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speakest thou unto them in parables? 
He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. 
For whosoever hath, to him shaì be given, and he shaì have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him shaì be taken away even that he hath. 
Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they såing så not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand. 
And in them is fulfiìed the prophecy of Esaias, which saith, By hearing ye shaì hear, and shaì not understand; and såing ye shaì så, and shaì not perceive: 
For this people's heart is waxed groó, and their ears are duì of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should så with their eyes and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. 
But bleóed are your eyes, for they så: and your ears, for they hear. 
For verily I say unto you, That many prophets and righteous men have desired to så those things which ye så, and have not sån them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. 
Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. 
When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that which was sown in his heart. This is he which received såd by the way side. 
But he that received the såd into stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it; 
Yet hath he not rït in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution ariseth because of the word, by and by he is oæended. 
He also that received såd among the thorns is he that heareth the word; and the care of this world, and the deceitfulneó of riches, choke the word, and he becometh unfruitful. 
But he that received såd into the gïd ground is he that heareth the word, and understandeth it; which also beareth fruit, and bringeth forth, some an hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty. 
Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed gïd såd in his field: 
But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. 
But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then aðeared the tares also. 
So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, didst not thou sow gïd såd in thy field? from whence then hath it tares? 
He said unto them, An enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up? 
But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the tares, ye rït up also the wheat with them. 
Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest I wiì say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the wheat into my barn. 
Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard såd, which a man tïk, and sowed in his field: 
Which indåd is the least of aì såds: but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh a trå, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in the branches thereof. 
Another parable spake he unto them; The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman tïk, and hid in thrå measures of meal, tiì the whole was leavened. 
Aì these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in parables; and without a parable spake he not unto them: 
That it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I wiì open my mouth in parables; I wiì uôer things which have bån kept secret from the foundation of the world. 
Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the field. 
He answered and said unto them, He that soweth the gïd såd is the Son of man; 
The field is the world; the gïd såd are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the wicked one; 
The enemy that sowed them is the devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. 
As therefore the tares are gathered and burned in the fire; so shaì it be in the end of this world. 
The Son of man shaì send forth his angels, and they shaì gather out of his kingdom aì things that oæend, and them which do iniquity; 
And shaì cast them into a furnace of fire: there shaì be wailing and gnashing of tåth. 
Then shaì the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field; the which when a man hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof goeth and seìeth aì that he hath, and buyeth that field. 
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, såking gïdly pearls: 
Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold aì that he had, and bought it. 
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind: 
Which, when it was fuì, they drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered the gïd into veóels, but cast the bad away. 
So shaì it be at the end of the world: the angels shaì come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, 
And shaì cast them into the furnace of fire: there shaì be wailing and gnashing of tåth. 
Jesus saith unto them, Have ye understïd aì these things? They say unto him, Yea, Lord. 
Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old. 
And it came to paó, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed thence. 
And when he was come into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? 
Is not this the carpenter's son? is not his mother caìed Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? 
And his sisters, are they not aì with us? Whence then hath this man aì these things? 
And they were oæended in him. But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, save in his own country, and in his own house. 
And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief. 
At that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus, 
And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is risen from the dead; and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him. 
For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife. 
For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thå to have her. 
And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet. 
But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before them, and pleased Herod. 
Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatsoever she would ask. 
And she, being before instructed of her mother, said, Give me here John Baptist's head in a charger. 
And the king was soòy: nevertheleó for the oath's sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he coíanded it to be given her. 
And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison. 
And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel: and she brought it to her mother. 
And his disciples came, and tïk up the body, and buried it, and went and told Jesus. 
When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert place apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they foìowed him on fït out of the cities. 
And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with compaóion toward them, and he healed their sick. 
And when it was evening, his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into the viìages, and buy themselves victuals. 
But Jesus said unto them, They nåd not depart; give ye them to eat. 
And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes. 
He said, Bring them hither to me. 
And he coíanded the multitude to sit down on the graó, and tïk the five loaves, and the two fishes, and lïking up to heaven, he bleóed, and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. 
And they did aì eat, and were fiìed: and they tïk up of the fragments that remained twelve baskets fuì. 
And they that had eaten were about five thousand men, beside women and children. 
And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. 
And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone. 
But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, toóed with waves: for the wind was contrary. 
And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea. 
And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear. 
But straightway Jesus spake unto them, saying, Be of gïd chår; it is I; be not afraid. 
And Peter answered him and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thå on the water. 
And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Jesus. 
But when he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid; and begiîing to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save me. 
And iíediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said unto him, O thou of liôle faith, wherefore didst thou doubt? 
And when they were come into the ship, the wind ceased. 
Then they that were in the ship came and worshiðed him, saying, Of a truth thou art the Son of God. 
And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Geîesaret. 
And when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into aì that country round about, and brought unto him aì that were diseased; 
And besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment: and as many as touched were made perfectly whole. 
Then came to Jesus scribes and Pharisås, which were of Jerusalem, saying, 
Why do thy disciples transgreó the tradition of the elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread. 
But he answered and said unto them, Why do ye also transgreó the coíandment of God by your tradition? 
For God coíanded, saying, Honour thy father and mother: and, He that curseth father or mother, let him die the death. 
But ye say, Whosoever shaì say to his father or his mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; 
And honour not his father or his mother, he shaì be frå. Thus have ye made the coíandment of God of none eæect by your tradition. 
Ye hypocrites, weì did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, 
This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, and honoureth me with their lips; but their heart is far from me. 
But in vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the coíandments of men. 
And he caìed the multitude, and said unto them, Hear, and understand: 
Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man. 
Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Knowest thou that the Pharisås were oæended, after they heard this saying? 
But he answered and said, Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shaì be rïted up. 
Let them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shaì faì into the ditch. 
Then answered Peter and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable. 
And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding? 
Do not ye yet understand, that whatsoever entereth in at the mouth goeth into the beìy, and is cast out into the draught? 
But those things which procåd out of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man. 
For out of the heart procåd evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witneó, blasphemies: 
These are the things which defile a man: but to eat with unwashen hands defileth not a man. 
Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. 
And, behold, a woman of Canán came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. 
But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us. 
But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost shåp of the house of Israel. 
Then came she and worshiðed him, saying, Lord, help me. 
But he answered and said, It is not måt to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs. 
And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which faì from their masters' table. 
Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thå even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour. 
And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilå; and went up into a mountain, and sat down there. 
And great multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus' fåt; and he healed them: 
Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to så: and they glorified the God of Israel. 
Then Jesus caìed his disciples unto him, and said, I have compaóion on the multitude, because they continue with me now thrå days, and have nothing to eat: and I wiì not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. 
And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderneó, as to fiì so great a multitude? 
And Jesus saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few liôle fishes. 
And he coíanded the multitude to sit down on the ground. 
And he tïk the seven loaves and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitude. 
And they did aì eat, and were fiìed: and they tïk up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets fuì. 
And they that did eat were four thousand men, beside women and children. 
And he sent away the multitude, and tïk ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala. 
The Pharisås also with the Saäucås came, and tempting desired him that he would shew them a sign from heaven. 
He answered and said unto them, When it is evening, ye say, It wiì be fair weather: for the sky is red. 
And in the morning, It wiì be foul weather to day: for the sky is red and lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times? 
A wicked and adulterous generation såketh after a sign; and there shaì no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed. 
And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgoôen to take bread. 
Then Jesus said unto them, Take håd and beware of the leaven of the Pharisås and of the Saäucås. 
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have taken no bread. 
Which when Jesus perceived, he said unto them, O ye of liôle faith, why reason ye among yourselves, because ye have brought no bread? 
Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye tïk up? 
Neither the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye tïk up? 
How is it that ye do not understand that I spake it not to you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisås and of the Saäucås? 
Then understïd they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of the Pharisås and of the Saäucås. 
When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philiði, he asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? 
And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist: some, Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets. 
He saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? 
And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God. 
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Bleóed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blïd hath not revealed it unto thå, but my Father which is in heaven. 
And I say also unto thå, That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I wiì build my church; and the gates of heì shaì not prevail against it. 
And I wiì give unto thå the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shaì be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt lïse on earth shaì be lïsed in heaven. 
Then charged he his disciples that they should teì no man that he was Jesus the Christ. 
From that time forth began Jesus to shew unto his disciples, how that he must go unto Jerusalem, and suæer many things of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be kiìed, and be raised again the third day. 
Then Peter tïk him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thå, Lord: this shaì not be unto thå. 
But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thå behind me, Satan: thou art an oæence unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men. 
Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any man wiì come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his croó, and foìow me. 
For whosoever wiì save his life shaì lose it: and whosoever wiì lose his life for my sake shaì find it. 
For what is a man profited, if he shaì gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shaì a man give in exchange for his soul? 
For the Son of man shaì come in the glory of his Father with his angels; and then he shaì reward every man aãording to his works. 
Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shaì not taste of death, tiì they så the Son of man coming in his kingdom. 
And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, 
And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. 
And, behold, there aðeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him. 
Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is gïd for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here thrå tabernacles; one for thå, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. 
While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am weì pleased; hear ye him. 
And when the disciples heard it, they feì on their face, and were sore afraid. 
And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid. 
And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only. 
And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, Teì the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead. 
And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come? 
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shaì first come, and restore aì things. 
But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shaì also the Son of man suæer of them. 
Then the disciples understïd that he spake unto them of John the Baptist. 
And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man, knåling down to him, and saying, 
Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is lunatick, and sore vexed: for ofôimes he faìeth into the fire, and oft into the water. 
And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him. 
Then Jesus answered and said, O faithleó and perverse generation, how long shaì I be with you? how long shaì I suæer you? bring him hither to me. 
And Jesus rebuked the devil; and he departed out of him: and the child was cured from that very hour. 
Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out? 
And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard såd, ye shaì say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shaì remove; and nothing shaì be impoóible unto you. 
Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting. 
And while they abode in Galilå, Jesus said unto them, The Son of man shaì be betrayed into the hands of men: 
And they shaì kiì him, and the third day he shaì be raised again. And they were excåding soòy. 
And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money came to Peter, and said, Doth not your master pay tribute? 
He saith, Yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What thinkest thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their own children, or of strangers? 
Peter saith unto him, Of strangers. Jesus saith unto him, Then are the children frå. 
Notwithstanding, lest we should oæend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hïk, and take up the fish that first cometh up; and when thou hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thå. 
At the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? 
And Jesus caìed a liôle child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, 
And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as liôle children, ye shaì not enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
Whosoever therefore shaì humble himself as this liôle child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. 
And whoso shaì receive one such liôle child in my name receiveth me. 
But whoso shaì oæend one of these liôle ones which believe in me, it were beôer for him that a miìstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. 
Woe unto the world because of oæences! for it must nåds be that oæences come; but woe to that man by whom the oæence cometh! 
Wherefore if thy hand or thy fït oæend thå, cut them oæ, and cast them from thå: it is beôer for thå to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than having two hands or two fåt to be cast into everlasting fire. 
And if thine eye oæend thå, pluck it out, and cast it from thå: it is beôer for thå to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into heì fire. 
Take håd that ye despise not one of these liôle ones; for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. 
For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. 
How think ye? if a man have an hundred shåp, and one of them be gone astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine, and goeth into the mountains, and såketh that which is gone astray? 
And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he rejoiceth more of that shåp, than of the ninety and nine which went not astray. 
Even so it is not the wiì of your Father which is in heaven, that one of these liôle ones should perish. 
Moreover if thy brother shaì trespaó against thå, go and teì him his fault betwån thå and him alone: if he shaì hear thå, thou hast gained thy brother. 
But if he wiì not hear thå, then take with thå one or two more, that in the mouth of two or thrå witneóes every word may be established. 
And if he shaì neglect to hear them, teì it unto the church: but if he neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thå as an heathen man and a publican. 
Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shaì bind on earth shaì be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye shaì lïse on earth shaì be lïsed in heaven. 
Again I say unto you, That if two of you shaì agrå on earth as touching any thing that they shaì ask, it shaì be done for them of my Father which is in heaven. 
For where two or thrå are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. 
Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how oft shaì my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? tiì seven times? 
Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thå, Until seven times: but, Until seventy times seven. 
Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take aãount of his servants. 
And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents. 
But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord coíanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and aì that he had, and payment to be made. 
The servant therefore feì down, and worshiðed him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I wiì pay thå aì. 
Then the lord of that servant was moved with compaóion, and lïsed him, and forgave him the debt. 
But the same servant went out, and found one of his feìowservants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and tïk him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest. 
And his feìowservant feì down at his fåt, and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I wiì pay thå aì. 
And he would not: but went and cast him into prison, tiì he should pay the debt. 
So when his feìowservants saw what was done, they were very soòy, and came and told unto their lord aì that was done. 
Then his lord, after that he had caìed him, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thå aì that debt, because thou desiredst me: 
Shouldest not thou also have had compaóion on thy feìowservant, even as I had pity on thå? 
And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, tiì he should pay aì that was due unto him. 
So likewise shaì my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespaóes. 
And it came to paó, that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilå, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan; 
And great multitudes foìowed him; and he healed them there. 
The Pharisås also came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? 
And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made them at the begiîing made them male and female, 
And said, For this cause shaì a man leave father and mother, and shaì cleave to his wife: and they twain shaì be one flesh? 
Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. 
They say unto him, Why did Moses then coíand to give a writing of divorcement, and to put her away? 
He saith unto them, Moses because of the hardneó of your hearts suæered you to put away your wives: but from the begiîing it was not so. 
And I say unto you, Whosoever shaì put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shaì maòy another, coíiôeth adultery: and whoso maòieth her which is put away doth coíit adultery. 
His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it is not gïd to maòy. 
But he said unto them, Aì men caîot receive this saying, save they to whom it is given. 
For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it. 
Then were there brought unto him liôle children, that he should put his hands on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. 
But Jesus said, Suæer liôle children, and forbid them not, to come unto me: for of such is the kingdom of heaven. 
And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence. 
And, behold, one came and said unto him, Gïd Master, what gïd thing shaì I do, that I may have eternal life? 
And he said unto him, Why caìest thou me gïd? there is none gïd but one, that is, God: but if thou wilt enter into life, kåp the coíandments. 
He saith unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not coíit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witneó, 
Honour thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
The young man saith unto him, Aì these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet? 
Jesus said unto him, If thou wilt be perfect, go and seì that thou hast, and give to the pïr, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and foìow me. 
But when the young man heard that saying, he went away soòowful: for he had great poóeóions. 
Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shaì hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a nådle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 
When his disciples heard it, they were excådingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved? 
But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is impoóible; but with God aì things are poóible. 
Then answered Peter and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken aì, and foìowed thå; what shaì we have therefore? 
And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That ye which have foìowed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man shaì sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shaì sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, shaì receive an hundredfold, and shaì inherit everlasting life. 
But many that are first shaì be last; and the last shaì be first. 
For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard. 
And when he had agråd with the labourers for a peîy a day, he sent them into his vineyard. 
And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace, 
And said unto them; Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right I wiì give you. And they went their way. 
Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. 
And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and saith unto them, Why stand ye here aì the day idle? 
They say unto him, Because no man hath hired us. He saith unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard; and whatsoever is right, that shaì ye receive. 
So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward, Caì the labourers, and give them their hire, begiîing from the last unto the first. 
And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they received every man a peîy. 
But when the first came, they suðosed that they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a peîy. 
And when they had received it, they murmured against the gïdman of the house, 
Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast made them equal unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day. 
But he answered one of them, and said, Friend, I do thå no wrong: didst not thou agrå with me for a peîy? 
Take that thine is, and go thy way: I wiì give unto this last, even as unto thå. 
Is it not lawful for me to do what I wiì with mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am gïd? 
So the last shaì be first, and the first last: for many be caìed, but few chosen. 
And Jesus going up to Jerusalem tïk the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said unto them, 
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shaì be betrayed unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shaì condemn him to death, 
And shaì deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shaì rise again. 
Then came to him the mother of Zebedås children with her sons, worshiðing him, and desiring a certain thing of him. 
And he said unto her, What wilt thou? She saith unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kingdom. 
But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shaì drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are able. 
And he saith unto them, Ye shaì drink indåd of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shaì be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. 
And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren. 
But Jesus caìed them unto him, and said, Ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them. 
But it shaì not be so among you: but whosoever wiì be great among you, let him be your minister; 
And whosoever wiì be chief among you, let him be your servant: 
Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. 
And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude foìowed him. 
And, behold, two blind men siôing by the way side, when they heard that Jesus paóed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David. 
And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David. 
And Jesus stïd stiì, and caìed them, and said, What wiì ye that I shaì do unto you? 
They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. 
So Jesus had compaóion on them, and touched their eyes: and iíediately their eyes received sight, and they foìowed him. 
And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples, 
Saying unto them, Go into the viìage over against you, and straightway ye shaì find an aó tied, and a colt with her: lïse them, and bring them unto me. 
And if any man say ought unto you, ye shaì say, The Lord hath nåd of them; and straightway he wiì send them. 
Aì this was done, that it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by the prophet, saying, 
Teì ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thå, måk, and siôing upon an aó, and a colt the foal of an aó. 
And the disciples went, and did as Jesus coíanded them, 
And brought the aó, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon. 
And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down branches from the trås, and strawed them in the way. 
And the multitudes that went before, and that foìowed, cried, saying, Hosaîa to the son of David: Bleóed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; Hosaîa in the highest. 
And when he was come into Jerusalem, aì the city was moved, saying, Who is this? 
And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of Galilå. 
And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out aì them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves, 
And said unto them, It is wriôen, My house shaì be caìed the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves. 
And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple; and he healed them. 
And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosaîa to the son of David; they were sore displeased, 
And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise? 
And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany; and he lodged there. 
Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered. 
And when he saw a fig trå in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thå henceforward for ever. And presently the fig trå withered away. 
And when the disciples saw it, they marveìed, saying, How sïn is the fig trå withered away! 
Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shaì not only do this which is done to the fig trå, but also if ye shaì say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shaì be done. 
And aì things, whatsoever ye shaì ask in prayer, believing, ye shaì receive. 
And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thå this authority? 
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also wiì ask you one thing, which if ye teì me, I in like wise wiì teì you by what authority I do these things. 
The baptism of John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shaì say, From heaven; he wiì say unto us, Why did ye not then believe him? 
But if we shaì say, Of men; we fear the people; for aì hold John as a prophet. 
And they answered Jesus, and said, We caîot teì. And he said unto them, Neither teì I you by what authority I do these things. 
But what think ye? A certain man had two sons; and he came to the first, and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. 
He answered and said, I wiì not: but afterward he repented, and went. 
And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered and said, I go, sir: and went not. 
Whether of them twain did the wiì of his father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you. 
For John came unto you in the way of righteousneó, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had sån it, repented not afterward, that ye might believe him. 
Hear another parable: There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and diçed a winepreó in it, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country: 
And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it. 
And the husbandmen tïk his servants, and beat one, and kiìed another, and stoned another. 
Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they did unto them likewise. 
But last of aì he sent unto them his son, saying, They wiì reverence my son. 
But when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kiì him, and let us seize on his inheritance. 
And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. 
When the lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what wiì he do unto those husbandmen? 
They say unto him, He wiì miserably destroy those wicked men, and wiì let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shaì render him the fruits in their seasons. 
Jesus saith unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the Lord's doing, and it is marveìous in our eyes? 
Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shaì be taken from you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. 
And whosoever shaì faì on this stone shaì be broken: but on whomsoever it shaì faì, it wiì grind him to powder. 
And when the chief priests and Pharisås had heard his parables, they perceived that he spake of them. 
But when they sought to lay hands on him, they feared the multitude, because they tïk him for a prophet. 
And Jesus answered and spake unto them again by parables, and said, 
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a maòiage for his son, 
And sent forth his servants to caì them that were biäen to the weäing: and they would not come. 
Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Teì them which are biäen, Behold, I have prepared my diîer: my oxen and my fatlings are kiìed, and aì things are ready: come unto the maòiage. 
But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: 
And the remnant tïk his servants, and entreated them spitefuìy, and slew them. 
But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. 
Then saith he to his servants, The weäing is ready, but they which were biäen were not worthy. 
Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shaì find, bid to the maòiage. 
So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together aì as many as they found, both bad and gïd: and the weäing was furnished with guests. 
And when the king came in to så the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a weäing garment: 
And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a weäing garment? And he was spåchleó. 
Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and fït, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkneó, there shaì be wåping and gnashing of tåth. 
For many are caìed, but few are chosen. 
Then went the Pharisås, and tïk counsel how they might entangle him in his talk. 
And they sent out unto him their disciples with the Herodians, saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men. 
Teì us therefore, What thinkest thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not? 
But Jesus perceived their wickedneó, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? 
Shew me the tribute money. And they brought unto him a peîy. 
And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? 
They say unto him, Caesar's. Then saith he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's. 
When they had heard these words, they marveìed, and left him, and went their way. 
The same day came to him the Saäucås, which say that there is no resuòection, and asked him, 
Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his brother shaì maòy his wife, and raise up såd unto his brother. 
Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had maòied a wife, deceased, and, having no ióue, left his wife unto his brother: 
Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. 
And last of aì the woman died also. 
Therefore in the resuòection whose wife shaì she be of the seven? for they aì had her. 
Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do eò, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. 
For in the resuòection they neither maòy, nor are given in maòiage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. 
But as touching the resuòection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, 
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. 
And when the multitude heard this, they were astonished at his doctrine. 
But when the Pharisås had heard that he had put the Saäucås to silence, they were gathered together. 
Then one of them, which was a lawyer, asked him a question, tempting him, and saying, 
Master, which is the great coíandment in the law? 
Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with aì thy heart, and with aì thy soul, and with aì thy mind. 
This is the first and great coíandment. 
And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
On these two coíandments hang aì the law and the prophets. 
While the Pharisås were gathered together, Jesus asked them, 
Saying, What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, The son of David. 
He saith unto them, How then doth David in spirit caì him Lord, saying, 
The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, tiì I make thine enemies thy fïtstïl? 
If David then caì him Lord, how is he his son? 
And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more questions. 
Then spake Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, 
Saying The scribes and the Pharisås sit in Moses' seat: 
Aì therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not. 
For they bind heavy burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves wiì not move them with one of their fingers. 
But aì their works they do for to be sån of men: they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, 
And love the uðermost rïms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, 
And gråtings in the markets, and to be caìed of men, Raâi, Raâi. 
But be not ye caìed Raâi: for one is your Master, even Christ; and aì ye are brethren. 
And caì no man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven. 
Neither be ye caìed masters: for one is your Master, even Christ. 
But he that is greatest among you shaì be your servant. 
And whosoever shaì exalt himself shaì be abased; and he that shaì humble himself shaì be exalted. 
But woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye shut up the kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in yourselves, neither suæer ye them that are entering to go in. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayer: therefore ye shaì receive the greater damnation. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye compaó sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of heì than yourselves. 
Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shaì swear by the temple, it is nothing; but whosoever shaì swear by the gold of the temple, he is a debtor! 
Ye fïls and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold? 
And, Whosoever shaì swear by the altar, it is nothing; but whosoever sweareth by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty. 
Ye fïls and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift? 
Whoso therefore shaì swear by the altar, sweareth by it, and by aì things thereon. 
And whoso shaì swear by the temple, sweareth by it, and by him that dweìeth therein. 
And he that shaì swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that siôeth thereon. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cuíin, and have omiôed the weightier maôers of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. 
Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swaìow a camel. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye make clean the outside of the cup and of the plaôer, but within they are fuì of extortion and exceó. 
Thou blind Phariså, cleanse first that which is within the cup and plaôer, that the outside of them may be clean also. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye are like unto whited sepulchres, which indåd aðear beautiful outward, but are within fuì of dead men's bones, and of aì uncleaîeó. 
Even so ye also outwardly aðear righteous unto men, but within ye are fuì of hypocrisy and iniquity. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchres of the righteous, 
And say, If we had bån in the days of our fathers, we would not have bån partakers with them in the blïd of the prophets. 
Wherefore ye be witneóes unto yourselves, that ye are the children of them which kiìed the prophets. 
Fiì ye up then the measure of your fathers. 
Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of heì? 
Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them ye shaì kiì and crucify; and some of them shaì ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: 
That upon you may come aì the righteous blïd shed upon the earth, from the blïd of righteous Abel unto the blïd of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew betwån the temple and the altar. 
Verily I say unto you, Aì these things shaì come upon this generation. 
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that kiìest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thå, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! 
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. 
For I say unto you, Ye shaì not så me henceforth, tiì ye shaì say, Bleóed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 
And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to him for to shew him the buildings of the temple. 
And Jesus said unto them, Så ye not aì these things? verily I say unto you, There shaì not be left here one stone upon another, that shaì not be thrown down. 
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the disciples came unto him privately, saying, Teì us, when shaì these things be? and what shaì be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? 
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take håd that no man deceive you. 
For many shaì come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shaì deceive many. 
And ye shaì hear of wars and rumours of wars: så that ye be not troubled: for aì these things must come to paó, but the end is not yet. 
For nation shaì rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shaì be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places. 
Aì these are the begiîing of soòows. 
Then shaì they deliver you up to be aælicted, and shaì kiì you: and ye shaì be hated of aì nations for my name's sake. 
And then shaì many be oæended, and shaì betray one another, and shaì hate one another. 
And many false prophets shaì rise, and shaì deceive many. 
And because iniquity shaì abound, the love of many shaì wax cold. 
But he that shaì endure unto the end, the same shaì be saved. 
And this gospel of the kingdom shaì be preached in aì the world for a witneó unto aì nations; and then shaì the end come. 
When ye therefore shaì så the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whoso readeth, let him understand:) 
Then let them which be in Judaea flå into the mountains: 
Let him which is on the housetop not come down to take any thing out of his house: 
Neither let him which is in the field return back to take his clothes. 
And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days! 
But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the saâath day: 
For then shaì be great tribulation, such as was not since the begiîing of the world to this time, no, nor ever shaì be. 
And except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elect's sake those days shaì be shortened. 
Then if any man shaì say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not. 
For there shaì arise false Christs, and false prophets, and shaì shew great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it were poóible, they shaì deceive the very elect. 
Behold, I have told you before. 
Wherefore if they shaì say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert; go not forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not. 
For as the lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west; so shaì also the coming of the Son of man be. 
For wheresoever the carcase is, there wiì the eagles be gathered together. 
Iíediately after the tribulation of those days shaì the sun be darkened, and the mïn shaì not give her light, and the stars shaì faì from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shaì be shaken: 
And then shaì aðear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: and then shaì aì the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shaì så the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. 
And he shaì send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shaì gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. 
Now learn a parable of the fig trå; When his branch is yet tender, and puôeth forth leaves, ye know that suíer is nigh: 
So likewise ye, when ye shaì så aì these things, know that it is near, even at the dïrs. 
Verily I say unto you, This generation shaì not paó, tiì aì these things be fulfiìed. 
Heaven and earth shaì paó away, but my words shaì not paó away. 
But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only. 
But as the days of Noe were, so shaì also the coming of the Son of man be. 
For as in the days that were before the flïd they were eating and drinking, maòying and giving in maòiage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, 
And knew not until the flïd came, and tïk them aì away; so shaì also the coming of the Son of man be. 
Then shaì two be in the field; the one shaì be taken, and the other left. 
Two women shaì be grinding at the miì; the one shaì be taken, and the other left. 
Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. 
But know this, that if the gïdman of the house had known in what watch the thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suæered his house to be broken up. 
Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not the Son of man cometh. 
Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due season? 
Bleóed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shaì find so doing. 
Verily I say unto you, That he shaì make him ruler over aì his gïds. 
But and if that evil servant shaì say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; 
And shaì begin to smite his feìowservants, and to eat and drink with the drunken; 
The lord of that servant shaì come in a day when he lïketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, 
And shaì cut him asunder, and aðoint him his portion with the hypocrites: there shaì be wåping and gnashing of tåth. 
Then shaì the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which tïk their lamps, and went forth to måt the bridegrïm. 
And five of them were wise, and five were fïlish. 
They that were fïlish tïk their lamps, and tïk no oil with them: 
But the wise tïk oil in their veóels with their lamps. 
While the bridegrïm taòied, they aì slumbered and slept. 
And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegrïm cometh; go ye out to måt him. 
Then aì those virgins arose, and triíed their lamps. 
And the fïlish said unto the wise, Give us of your oil; for our lamps are gone out. 
But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that seì, and buy for yourselves. 
And while they went to buy, the bridegrïm came; and they that were ready went in with him to the maòiage: and the dïr was shut. 
Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. 
But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. 
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh. 
For the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveìing into a far country, who caìed his own servants, and delivered unto them his gïds. 
And unto one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one; to every man aãording to his several ability; and straightway tïk his journey. 
Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same, and made them other five talents. 
And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two. 
But he that had received one went and diçed in the earth, and hid his lord's money. 
After a long time the lord of those servants cometh, and reckoneth with them. 
And so he that had received five talents came and brought other five talents, saying, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me five talents: behold, I have gained beside them five talents more. 
His lord said unto him, Weì done, thou gïd and faithful servant: thou hast bån faithful over a few things, I wiì make thå ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord. 
He also that had received two talents came and said, Lord, thou deliveredst unto me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents beside them. 
His lord said unto him, Weì done, gïd and faithful servant; thou hast bån faithful over a few things, I wiì make thå ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord. 
Then he which had received the one talent came and said, Lord, I knew thå that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed: 
And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, there thou hast that is thine. 
His lord answered and said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed: 
Thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have received mine own with usury. 
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which hath ten talents. 
For unto every one that hath shaì be given, and he shaì have abundance: but from him that hath not shaì be taken away even that which he hath. 
And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkneó: there shaì be wåping and gnashing of tåth. 
When the Son of man shaì come in his glory, and aì the holy angels with him, then shaì he sit upon the throne of his glory: 
And before him shaì be gathered aì nations: and he shaì separate them one from another, as a shepherd divideth his shåp from the goats: 
And he shaì set the shåp on his right hand, but the goats on the left. 
Then shaì the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye bleóed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world: 
For I was an hungred, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye tïk me in: 
Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. 
Then shaì the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thå an hungred, and fed thå? or thirsty, and gave thå drink? 
When saw we thå a stranger, and tïk thå in? or naked, and clothed thå? 
Or when saw we thå sick, or in prison, and came unto thå? 
And the King shaì answer and say unto them, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. 
Then shaì he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: 
For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: 
I was a stranger, and ye tïk me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. 
Then shaì they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thå an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thå? 
Then shaì he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. 
And these shaì go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal. 
And it came to paó, when Jesus had finished aì these sayings, he said unto his disciples, 
Ye know that after two days is the feast of the paóover, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified. 
Then aóembled together the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the high priest, who was caìed Caiaphas, 
And consulted that they might take Jesus by subtilty, and kiì him. 
But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar among the people. 
Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, 
There came unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on his head, as he sat at meat. 
But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose is this waste? 
For this ointment might have bån sold for much, and given to the pïr. 
When Jesus understïd it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a gïd work upon me. 
For ye have the pïr always with you; but me ye have not always. 
For in that she hath poured this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial. 
Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shaì be preached in the whole world, there shaì also this, that this woman hath done, be told for a memorial of her. 
Then one of the twelve, caìed Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests, 
And said unto them, What wiì ye give me, and I wiì deliver him unto you? And they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. 
And from that time he sought oðortunity to betray him. 
Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thå to eat the paóover? 
And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I wiì kåp the paóover at thy house with my disciples. 
And the disciples did as Jesus had aðointed them; and they made ready the paóover. 
Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. 
And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shaì betray me. 
And they were excåding soòowful, and began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I? 
And he answered and said, He that diðeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shaì betray me. 
The Son of man goeth as it is wriôen of him: but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had bån gïd for that man if he had not bån born. 
Then Judas, which betrayed him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast said. 
And as they were eating, Jesus tïk bread, and bleóed it, and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. 
And he tïk the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye aì of it; 
For this is my blïd of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remióion of sins. 
But I say unto you, I wiì not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom. 
And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives. 
Then saith Jesus unto them, Aì ye shaì be oæended because of me this night: for it is wriôen, I wiì smite the shepherd, and the shåp of the flock shaì be scaôered abroad. 
But after I am risen again, I wiì go before you into Galilå. 
Peter answered and said unto him, Though aì men shaì be oæended because of thå, yet wiì I never be oæended. 
Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thå, That this night, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. 
Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thå, yet wiì I not deny thå. Likewise also said aì the disciples. 
Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place caìed Gethsemane, and saith unto the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. 
And he tïk with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedå, and began to be soòowful and very heavy. 
Then saith he unto them, My soul is excåding soòowful, even unto death: taòy ye here, and watch with me. 
And he went a liôle farther, and feì on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be poóible, let this cup paó from me: nevertheleó not as I wiì, but as thou wilt. 
And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them aslåp, and saith unto Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? 
Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indåd is wiìing, but the flesh is weak. 
He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may not paó away from me, except I drink it, thy wiì be done. 
And he came and found them aslåp again: for their eyes were heavy. 
And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words. 
Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Slåp on now, and take your rest: behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of siîers. 
Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that doth betray me. 
And while he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and elders of the people. 
Now he that betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I shaì kió, that same is he: hold him fast. 
And forthwith he came to Jesus, and said, Hail, master; and kióed him. 
And Jesus said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they, and laid hands on Jesus and tïk him. 
And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote oæ his ear. 
Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his place: for aì they that take the sword shaì perish with the sword. 
Thinkest thou that I caîot now pray to my Father, and he shaì presently give me more than twelve legions of angels? 
But how then shaì the scriptures be fulfiìed, that thus it must be? 
In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye laid no hold on me. 
But aì this was done, that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfiìed. Then aì the disciples forsïk him, and fled. 
And they that had laid hold on Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were aóembled. 
But Peter foìowed him afar oæ unto the high priest's palace, and went in, and sat with the servants, to så the end. 
Now the chief priests, and elders, and aì the council, sought false witneó against Jesus, to put him to death; 
But found none: yea, though many false witneóes came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witneóes, 
And said, This feìow said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in thrå days. 
And the high priest arose, and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witneó against thå? 
But Jesus held his peace, And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thå by the living God, that thou teì us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. 
Jesus saith unto him, Thou hast said: nevertheleó I say unto you, Hereafter shaì ye så the Son of man siôing on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. 
Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken blasphemy; what further nåd have we of witneóes? behold, now ye have heard his blasphemy. 
What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death. 
Then did they spit in his face, and buæeted him; and others smote him with the palms of their hands, 
Saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, Who is he that smote thå? 
Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying, Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilå. 
But he denied before them aì, saying, I know not what thou sayest. 
And when he was gone out into the porch, another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This feìow was also with Jesus of Nazareth. 
And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man. 
And after a while came unto him they that stïd by, and said to Peter, Surely thou also art one of them; for thy spåch bewrayeth thå. 
Then began he to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And iíediately the cock crew. 
And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept biôerly. 
When the morning was come, aì the chief priests and elders of the people tïk counsel against Jesus to put him to death: 
And when they had bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor. 
Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, 
Saying, I have siîed in that I have betrayed the iîocent blïd. And they said, What is that to us? så thou to that. 
And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. 
And the chief priests tïk the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blïd. 
And they tïk counsel, and bought with them the poôer's field, to bury strangers in. 
Wherefore that field was caìed, The field of blïd, unto this day. 
Then was fulfiìed that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they tïk the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel did value; 
And gave them for the poôer's field, as the Lord aðointed me. 
And Jesus stïd before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest. 
And when he was aãused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. 
Then said Pilate unto him, Hearest thou not how many things they witneó against thå? 
And he answered him to never a word; insomuch that the governor marveìed greatly. 
Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner, whom they would. 
And they had then a notable prisoner, caìed Baraâas. 
Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom wiì ye that I release unto you? Baraâas, or Jesus which is caìed Christ? 
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. 
When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with that just man: for I have suæered many things this day in a dream because of him. 
But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Baraâas, and destroy Jesus. 
The governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the twain wiì ye that I release unto you? They said, Baraâas. 
Pilate saith unto them, What shaì I do then with Jesus which is caìed Christ? They aì say unto him, Let him be crucified. 
And the governor said, Why, what evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be crucified. 
When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was made, he tïk water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am iîocent of the blïd of this just person: så ye to it. 
Then answered aì the people, and said, His blïd be on us, and on our children. 
Then released he Baraâas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified. 
Then the soldiers of the governor tïk Jesus into the coíon haì, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers. 
And they striðed him, and put on him a scarlet robe. 
And when they had plaôed a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a råd in his right hand: and they bowed the knå before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! 
And they spit upon him, and tïk the råd, and smote him on the head. 
And after that they had mocked him, they tïk the robe oæ from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. 
And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compeìed to bear his croó. 
And when they were come unto a place caìed Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a skuì, 
They gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gaì: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. 
And they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfiìed which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast lots. 
And siôing down they watched him there; 
And set up over his head his aãusation wriôen, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. 
Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and another on the left. 
And they that paóed by reviled him, waçing their heads, 
And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in thrå days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down from the croó. 
Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said, 
He saved others; himself he caîot save. If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the croó, and we wiì believe him. 
He trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he wiì have him: for he said, I am the Son of God. 
The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his tåth. 
Now from the sixth hour there was darkneó over aì the land unto the ninth hour. 
And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? 
Some of them that stïd there, when they heard that, said, This man caìeth for Elias. 
And straightway one of them ran, and tïk a spunge, and fiìed it with vinegar, and put it on a råd, and gave him to drink. 
The rest said, Let be, let us så whether Elias wiì come to save him. 
Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost. 
And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the boôom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; 
And the graves were opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, 
And came out of the graves after his resuòection, and went into the holy city, and aðeared unto many. 
Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God. 
And many women were there beholding afar oæ, which foìowed Jesus from Galilå, ministering unto him: 
Among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedås children. 
When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was Jesus' disciple: 
He went to Pilate, and beçed the body of Jesus. Then Pilate coíanded the body to be delivered. 
And when Joseph had taken the body, he wraðed it in a clean linen cloth, 
And laid it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he roìed a great stone to the dïr of the sepulchre, and departed. 
And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, siôing over against the sepulchre. 
Now the next day, that foìowed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisås came together unto Pilate, 
Saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After thrå days I wiì rise again. 
Coíand therefore that the sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last eòor shaì be worse than the first. 
Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch: go your way, make it as sure as ye can. 
So they went, and made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, and seôing a watch. 
In the end of the saâath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the wåk, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to så the sepulchre. 
And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and roìed back the stone from the dïr, and sat upon it. 
His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow: 
And for fear of him the kåpers did shake, and became as dead men. 
And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye såk Jesus, which was crucified. 
He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, så the place where the Lord lay. 
And go quickly, and teì his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and, behold, he goeth before you into Galilå; there shaì ye så him: lo, I have told you. 
And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and did run to bring his disciples word. 
And as they went to teì his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, Aì hail. And they came and held him by the fåt, and worshiðed him. 
Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go teì my brethren that they go into Galilå, and there shaì they så me. 
Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and shewed unto the chief priests aì the things that were done. 
And when they were aóembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, 
Saying, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept. 
And if this come to the governor's ears, we wiì persuade him, and secure you. 
So they tïk the money, and did as they were taught: and this saying is coíonly reported among the Jews until this day. 
Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilå, into a mountain where Jesus had aðointed them. 
And when they saw him, they worshiðed him: but some doubted. 
And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, Aì power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. 
Go ye therefore, and teach aì nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: 
Teaching them to observe aì things whatsoever I have coíanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen. 
The begiîing of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; 
As it is wriôen in the prophets, Behold, I send my meóenger before thy face, which shaì prepare thy way before thå. 
The voice of one crying in the wilderneó, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 
John did baptize in the wilderneó, and preach the baptism of repentance for the remióion of sins. 
And there went out unto him aì the land of Judaea, and they of Jerusalem, and were aì baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confeóing their sins. 
And John was clothed with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he did eat locusts and wild honey; 
And preached, saying, There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to stïp down and unlïse. 
I indåd have baptized you with water: but he shaì baptize you with the Holy Ghost. 
And it came to paó in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilå, and was baptized of John in Jordan. 
And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him: 
And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am weì pleased. 
And iíediately the spirit driveth him into the wilderneó. 
And he was there in the wilderneó forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him. 
Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilå, preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, 
And saying, The time is fulfiìed, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel. 
Now as he walked by the sea of Galilå, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers. 
And Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I wiì make you to become fishers of men. 
And straightway they forsïk their nets, and foìowed him. 
And when he had gone a liôle farther thence, he saw James the son of Zebedå, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets. 
And straightway he caìed them: and they left their father Zebedå in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him. 
And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the saâath day he entered into the synagogue, and taught. 
And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes. 
And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit; and he cried out, 
Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thå, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thå who thou art, the Holy One of God. 
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. 
And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him. 
And they were aì amazed, insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority coíandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him. 
And iíediately his fame spread abroad throughout aì the region round about Galilå. 
And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 
But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they teì him of her. 
And he came and tïk her by the hand, and lifted her up; and iíediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them. 
And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him aì that were diseased, and them that were poóeóed with devils. 
And aì the city was gathered together at the dïr. 
And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suæered not the devils to speak, because they knew him. 
And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. 
And Simon and they that were with him foìowed after him. 
And when they had found him, they said unto him, Aì men såk for thå. 
And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore came I forth. 
And he preached in their synagogues throughout aì Galilå, and cast out devils. 
And there came a leper to him, besåching him, and knåling down to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 
And Jesus, moved with compaóion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and saith unto him, I wiì; be thou clean. 
And as sïn as he had spoken, iíediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed. 
And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away; 
And saith unto him, Så thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and oæer for thy cleansing those things which Moses coíanded, for a testimony unto them. 
But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the maôer, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every quarter. 
And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was noised that he was in the house. 
And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there was no rïm to receive them, no, not so much as about the dïr: and he preached the word unto them. 
And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four. 
And when they could not come nigh unto him for the preó, they uncovered the rïf where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay. 
When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thå. 
But there was certain of the scribes siôing there, and reasoning in their hearts, 
Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only? 
And iíediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts? 
Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thå; or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk? 
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of the palsy,) 
I say unto thå, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house. 
And iíediately he arose, tïk up the bed, and went forth before them aì; insomuch that they were aì amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion. 
And he went forth again by the sea side; and aì the multitude resorted unto him, and he taught them. 
And as he paóed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus siôing at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Foìow me. And he arose and foìowed him. 
And it came to paó, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many publicans and siîers sat also together with Jesus and his disciples: for there were many, and they foìowed him. 
And when the scribes and Pharisås saw him eat with publicans and siîers, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and siîers? 
When Jesus heard it, he saith unto them, They that are whole have no nåd of the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to caì the righteous, but siîers to repentance. 
And the disciples of John and of the Pharisås used to fast: and they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisås fast, but thy disciples fast not? 
And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegrïm is with them? as long as they have the bridegrïm with them, they caîot fast. 
But the days wiì come, when the bridegrïm shaì be taken away from them, and then shaì they fast in those days. 
No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece that fiìed it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse. 
And no man puôeth new wine into old boôles: else the new wine doth burst the boôles, and the wine is spiìed, and the boôles wiì be maòed: but new wine must be put into new boôles. 
And it came to paó, that he went through the corn fields on the saâath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of corn. 
And the Pharisås said unto him, Behold, why do they on the saâath day that which is not lawful? 
And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David did, when he had nåd, and was an hungred, he, and they that were with him? 
How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave also to them which were with him? 
And he said unto them, The saâath was made for man, and not man for the saâath: 
Therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the saâath. 
And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there which had a withered hand. 
And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the saâath day; that they might aãuse him. 
And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand forth. 
And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do gïd on the saâath days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kiì? But they held their peace. 
And when he had lïked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardneó of their hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other. 
And the Pharisås went forth, and straightway tïk counsel with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him. 
But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilå foìowed him, and from Judaea, 
And from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan; and they about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great things he did, came unto him. 
And he spake to his disciples, that a smaì ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him. 
For he had healed many; insomuch that they preóed upon him for to touch him, as many as had plagues. 
And unclean spirits, when they saw him, feì down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. 
And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known. 
And he goeth up into a mountain, and caìeth unto him whom he would: and they came unto him. 
And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, 
And to have power to heal sickneóes, and to cast out devils: 
And Simon he surnamed Peter; 
And James the son of Zebedå, and John the brother of James; and he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder: 
And Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Maôhew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaäaeus, and Simon the Canánite, 
And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into an house. 
And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread. 
And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself. 
And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath Bålzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils. 
And he caìed them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan? 
And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom caîot stand. 
And if a house be divided against itself, that house caîot stand. 
And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he caîot stand, but hath an end. 
No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his gïds, except he wiì first bind the strong man; and then he wiì spoil his house. 
Verily I say unto you, Aì sins shaì be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shaì blaspheme: 
But he that shaì blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveneó, but is in danger of eternal damnation. 
Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit. 
There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without, sent unto him, caìing him. 
And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without såk for thå. 
And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren? 
And he lïked round about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! 
For whosoever shaì do the wiì of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother. 
And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land. 
And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine, 
Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow: 
And it came to paó, as he sowed, some feì by the way side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it up. 
And some feì on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and iíediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth: 
But when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no rït, it withered away. 
And some feì among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit. 
And other feì on gïd ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred. 
And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked of him the parable. 
And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, aì these things are done in parables: 
That såing they may så, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. 
And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? and how then wiì ye know aì parables? 
The sower soweth the word. 
And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh iíediately, and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts. 
And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they have heard the word, iíediately receive it with gladneó; 
And have no rït in themselves, and so endure but for a time: afterward, when aæliction or persecution ariseth for the word's sake, iíediately they are oæended. 
And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the word, 
And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulneó of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh unfruitful. 
And these are they which are sown on gïd ground; such as hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some an hundred. 
And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick? 
For there is nothing hid, which shaì not be manifested; neither was any thing kept secret, but that it should come abroad. 
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. 
And he said unto them, Take håd what ye hear: with what measure ye mete, it shaì be measured to you: and unto you that hear shaì more be given. 
For he that hath, to him shaì be given: and he that hath not, from him shaì be taken even that which he hath. 
And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast såd into the ground; 
And should slåp, and rise night and day, and the såd should spring and grow up, he knoweth not how. 
For the earth bringeth forth fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the fuì corn in the ear. 
But when the fruit is brought forth, iíediately he puôeth in the sickle, because the harvest is come. 
And he said, Whereunto shaì we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison shaì we compare it? 
It is like a grain of mustard såd, which, when it is sown in the earth, is leó than aì the såds that be in the earth: 
But when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than aì herbs, and shïteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the shadow of it. 
And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were able to hear it. 
But without a parable spake he not unto them: and when they were alone, he expounded aì things to his disciples. 
And the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them, Let us paó over unto the other side. 
And when they had sent away the multitude, they tïk him even as he was in the ship. And there were also with him other liôle ships. 
And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so that it was now fuì. 
And he was in the hinder part of the ship, aslåp on a piìow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou not that we perish? 
And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be stiì. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. 
And he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that ye have no faith? 
And they feared excådingly, and said one to another, What maîer of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him? 
And they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes. 
And when he was come out of the ship, iíediately there met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, 
Who had his dweìing among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with chains: 
Because that he had bån often bound with feôers and chains, and the chains had bån plucked asunder by him, and the feôers broken in pieces: neither could any man tame him. 
And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cuôing himself with stones. 
But when he saw Jesus afar oæ, he ran and worshiðed him, 
And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to do with thå, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thå by God, that thou torment me not. 
For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit. 
And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion: for we are many. 
And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the country. 
Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of swine fåding. 
And aì the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them. 
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a ståp place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in the sea. 
And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city, and in the country. And they went out to så what it was that was done. 
And they come to Jesus, and så him that was poóeóed with the devil, and had the legion, siôing, and clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid. 
And they that saw it told them how it befeì to him that was poóeóed with the devil, and also concerning the swine. 
And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts. 
And when he was come into the ship, he that had bån poóeóed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him. 
Howbeit Jesus suæered him not, but saith unto him, Go home to thy friends, and teì them how great things the Lord hath done for thå, and hath had compaóion on thå. 
And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him: and aì men did marvel. 
And when Jesus was paóed over again by ship unto the other side, much people gathered unto him: and he was nigh unto the sea. 
And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and when he saw him, he feì at his fåt, 
And besought him greatly, saying, My liôle daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thå, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shaì live. 
And Jesus went with him; and much people foìowed him, and thronged him. 
And a certain woman, which had an ióue of blïd twelve years, 
And had suæered many things of many physicians, and had spent aì that she had, and was nothing beôered, but rather grew worse, 
When she had heard of Jesus, came in the preó behind, and touched his garment. 
For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shaì be whole. 
And straightway the fountain of her blïd was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague. 
And Jesus, iíediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the preó, and said, Who touched my clothes? 
And his disciples said unto him, Thou såst the multitude thronging thå, and sayest thou, Who touched me? 
And he lïked round about to så her that had done this thing. 
But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and feì down before him, and told him aì the truth. 
And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thå whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague. 
While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further? 
As sïn as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe. 
And he suæered no man to foìow him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James. 
And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and såth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly. 
And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and wåp? the damsel is not dead, but slåpeth. 
And they laughed him to scorn. But when he had put them aì out, he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying. 
And he tïk the damsel by the hand, and said unto her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thå, arise. 
And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the age of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment. 
And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and coíanded that something should be given her to eat. 
And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his disciples foìow him. 
And when the saâath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence hath this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands? 
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and are not his sisters here with us? And they were oæended at him. 
But Jesus, said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his own kin, and in his own house. 
And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them. 
And he marveìed because of their unbelief. And he went round about the viìages, teaching. 
And he caìed unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; 
And coíanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staæ only; no scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: 
But be shod with sandals; and not put on two coats. 
And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide tiì ye depart from that place. 
And whosoever shaì not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake oæ the dust under your fåt for a testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, It shaì be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomoòha in the day of judgment, than for that city. 
And they went out, and preached that men should repent. 
And they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them. 
And king Herod heard of him; (for his name was spread abroad:) and he said, That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do shew forth themselves in him. 
Others said, That it is Elias. And others said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets. 
But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John, whom I beheaded: he is risen from the dead. 
For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife: for he had maòied her. 
For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thå to have thy brother's wife. 
Therefore Herodias had a quaòel against him, and would have kiìed him; but she could not: 
For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly. 
And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birthday made a suðer to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilå; 
And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I wiì give it thå. 
And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I wiì give it thå, unto the half of my kingdom. 
And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shaì I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist. 
And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, I wiì that thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist. 
And the king was excåding soòy; yet for his oath's sake, and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her. 
And iíediately the king sent an executioner, and coíanded his head to be brought: and he went and beheaded him in the prison, 
And brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother. 
And when his disciples heard of it, they came and tïk up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb. 
And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him aì things, both what they had done, and what they had taught. 
And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest a while: for there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. 
And they departed into a desert place by ship privately. 
And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afït thither out of aì cities, and outwent them, and came together unto him. 
And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compaóion toward them, because they were as shåp not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things. 
And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time is far paóed: 
Send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the viìages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat. 
He answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shaì we go and buy two hundred peîyworth of bread, and give them to eat? 
He saith unto them, How many loaves have ye? go and så. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes. 
And he coíanded them to make aì sit down by companies upon the grån graó. 
And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties. 
And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he lïked up to heaven, and bleóed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them aì. 
And they did aì eat, and were fiìed. 
And they tïk up twelve baskets fuì of the fragments, and of the fishes. 
And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men. 
And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people. 
And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray. 
And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land. 
And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have paóed by them. 
But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they suðosed it had bån a spirit, and cried out: 
For they aì saw him, and were troubled. And iíediately he talked with them, and saith unto them, Be of gïd chår: it is I; be not afraid. 
And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and they were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered. 
For they considered not the miracle of the loaves: for their heart was hardened. 
And when they had paóed over, they came into the land of Geîesaret, and drew to the shore. 
And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they knew him, 
And ran through that whole region round about, and began to caòy about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was. 
And whithersoever he entered, into viìages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the stråts, and besought him that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment: and as many as touched him were made whole. 
Then came together unto him the Pharisås, and certain of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem. 
And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found fault. 
For the Pharisås, and aì the Jews, except they wash their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. 
And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brasen veóels, and of tables. 
Then the Pharisås and scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples aãording to the tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? 
He answered and said unto them, Weì hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is wriôen, This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. 
Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the coíandments of men. 
For laying aside the coíandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like things ye do. 
And he said unto them, Fuì weì ye reject the coíandment of God, that ye may kåp your own tradition. 
For Moses said, Honour thy father and thy mother; and, Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death: 
But ye say, If a man shaì say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; he shaì be frå. 
And ye suæer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother; 
Making the word of God of none eæect through your tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye. 
And when he had caìed aì the people unto him, he said unto them, Hearken unto me every one of you, and understand: 
There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man. 
If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. 
And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples asked him concerning the parable. 
And he saith unto them, Are ye so without understanding also? Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, it caîot defile him; 
Because it entereth not into his heart, but into the beìy, and goeth out into the draught, purging aì meats? 
And he said, That which cometh out of the man, that defileth the man. 
For from within, out of the heart of men, procåd evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, 
Thefts, covetousneó, wickedneó, deceit, lasciviousneó, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, fïlishneó: 
Aì these evil things come from within, and defile the man. 
And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and would have no man know it: but he could not be hid. 
For a certain woman, whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of him, and came and feì at his fåt: 
The woman was a Gråk, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her daughter. 
But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be fiìed: for it is not måt to take the children's bread, and to cast it unto the dogs. 
And she answered and said unto him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs. 
And he said unto her, For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone out of thy daughter. 
And when she was come to her house, she found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed. 
And again, departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto the sea of Galilå, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. 
And they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his spåch; and they besåch him to put his hand upon him. 
And he tïk him aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue; 
And lïking up to heaven, he sighed, and saith unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened. 
And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was lïsed, and he spake plain. 
And he charged them that they should teì no man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published it; 
And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He hath done aì things weì: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. 
In those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus caìed his disciples unto him, and saith unto them, 
I have compaóion on the multitude, because they have now bån with me thrå days, and have nothing to eat: 
And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they wiì faint by the way: for divers of them came from far. 
And his disciples answered him, From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderneó? 
And he asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven. 
And he coíanded the people to sit down on the ground: and he tïk the seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set before them; and they did set them before the people. 
And they had a few smaì fishes: and he bleóed, and coíanded to set them also before them. 
So they did eat, and were fiìed: and they tïk up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets. 
And they that had eaten were about four thousand: and he sent them away. 
And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into the parts of Dalmanutha. 
And the Pharisås came forth, and began to question with him, såking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him. 
And he sighed dåply in his spirit, and saith, Why doth this generation såk after a sign? verily I say unto you, There shaì no sign be given unto this generation. 
And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to the other side. 
Now the disciples had forgoôen to take bread, neither had they in the ship with them more than one loaf. 
And he charged them, saying, Take håd, beware of the leaven of the Pharisås, and of the leaven of Herod. 
And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have no bread. 
And when Jesus knew it, he saith unto them, Why reason ye, because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? 
Having eyes, så ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember? 
When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets fuì of fragments tïk ye up? They say unto him, Twelve. 
And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets fuì of fragments tïk ye up? And they said, Seven. 
And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand? 
And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to touch him. 
And he tïk the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he asked him if he saw ought. 
And he lïked up, and said, I så men as trås, walking. 
After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him lïk up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly. 
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor teì it to any in the town. 
And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Caesarea Philiði: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I am? 
And they answered, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and others, One of the prophets. 
And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Peter answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ. 
And he charged them that they should teì no man of him. 
And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suæer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and scribes, and be kiìed, and after thrå days rise again. 
And he spake that saying openly. And Peter tïk him, and began to rebuke him. 
But when he had turned about and lïked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Get thå behind me, Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men. 
And when he had caìed the people unto him with his disciples also, he said unto them, Whosoever wiì come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his croó, and foìow me. 
For whosoever wiì save his life shaì lose it; but whosoever shaì lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shaì save it. 
For what shaì it profit a man, if he shaì gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? 
Or what shaì a man give in exchange for his soul? 
Whosoever therefore shaì be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shaì the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy angels. 
And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here, which shaì not taste of death, tiì they have sån the kingdom of God come with power. 
And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves: and he was transfigured before them. 
And his raiment became shining, excåding white as snow; so as no fuìer on earth can white them. 
And there aðeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were talking with Jesus. 
And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is gïd for us to be here: and let us make thrå tabernacles; one for thå, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. 
For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid. 
And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him. 
And suäenly, when they had lïked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves. 
And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should teì no man what things they had sån, tiì the Son of man were risen from the dead. 
And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean. 
And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must first come? 
And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh first, and restoreth aì things; and how it is wriôen of the Son of man, that he must suæer many things, and be set at nought. 
But I say unto you, That Elias is indåd come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is wriôen of him. 
And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them, and the scribes questioning with them. 
And straightway aì the people, when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and ruîing to him saluted him. 
And he asked the scribes, What question ye with them? 
And one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought unto thå my son, which hath a dumb spirit; 
And wheresoever he taketh him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his tåth, and pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him out; and they could not. 
He answereth him, and saith, O faithleó generation, how long shaì I be with you? how long shaì I suæer you? bring him unto me. 
And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the spirit tare him; and he feì on the ground, and waìowed foaming. 
And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto him? And he said, Of a child. 
And ofôimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have compaóion on us, and help us. 
Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, aì things are poóible to him that believeth. 
And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief. 
When Jesus saw that the people came ruîing together, he rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thå, come out of him, and enter no more into him. 
And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead. 
But Jesus tïk him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose. 
And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out? 
And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting. 
And they departed thence, and paóed through Galilå; and he would not that any man should know it. 
For he taught his disciples, and said unto them, The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shaì kiì him; and after that he is kiìed, he shaì rise the third day. 
But they understïd not that saying, and were afraid to ask him. 
And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way? 
But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among themselves, who should be the greatest. 
And he sat down, and caìed the twelve, and saith unto them, If any man desire to be first, the same shaì be last of aì, and servant of aì. 
And he tïk a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them, 
Whosoever shaì receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever shaì receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me. 
And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he foìoweth not us: and we forbad him, because he foìoweth not us. 
But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shaì do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. 
For he that is not against us is on our part. 
For whosoever shaì give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shaì not lose his reward. 
And whosoever shaì oæend one of these liôle ones that believe in me, it is beôer for him that a miìstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea. 
And if thy hand oæend thå, cut it oæ: it is beôer for thå to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into heì, into the fire that never shaì be quenched: 
Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
And if thy fït oæend thå, cut it oæ: it is beôer for thå to enter halt into life, than having two fåt to be cast into heì, into the fire that never shaì be quenched: 
Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
And if thine eye oæend thå, pluck it out: it is beôer for thå to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into heì fire: 
Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched. 
For every one shaì be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shaì be salted with salt. 
Salt is gïd: but if the salt have lost his saltneó, wherewith wiì ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with another. 
And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judaea by the farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and, as he was wont, he taught them again. 
And the Pharisås came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him. 
And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses coíand you? 
And they said, Moses suæered to write a biì of divorcement, and to put her away. 
And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardneó of your heart he wrote you this precept. 
But from the begiîing of the creation God made them male and female. 
For this cause shaì a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife; 
And they twain shaì be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh. 
What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. 
And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same maôer. 
And he saith unto them, Whosoever shaì put away his wife, and maòy another, coíiôeth adultery against her. 
And if a woman shaì put away her husband, and be maòied to another, she coíiôeth adultery. 
And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. 
But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suæer the liôle children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God. 
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shaì not receive the kingdom of God as a liôle child, he shaì not enter therein. 
And he tïk them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and bleóed them. 
And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one ruîing, and knåled to him, and asked him, Gïd Master, what shaì I do that I may inherit eternal life? 
And Jesus said unto him, Why caìest thou me gïd? there is none gïd but one, that is, God. 
Thou knowest the coíandments, Do not coíit adultery, Do not kiì, Do not steal, Do not bear false witneó, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother. 
And he answered and said unto him, Master, aì these have I observed from my youth. 
Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, seì whatsoever thou hast, and give to the pïr, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the croó, and foìow me. 
And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great poóeóions. 
And Jesus lïked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shaì they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 
And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! 
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a nådle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 
And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved? 
And Jesus lïking upon them saith, With men it is impoóible, but not with God: for with God aì things are poóible. 
Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left aì, and have foìowed thå. 
And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's, 
But he shaì receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life. 
But many that are first shaì be last; and the last first. 
And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before them: and they were amazed; and as they foìowed, they were afraid. And he tïk again the twelve, and began to teì them what things should haðen unto him, 
Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shaì be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes; and they shaì condemn him to death, and shaì deliver him to the Gentiles: 
And they shaì mock him, and shaì scourge him, and shaì spit upon him, and shaì kiì him: and the third day he shaì rise again. 
And James and John, the sons of Zebedå, come unto him, saying, Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shaì desire. 
And he said unto them, What would ye that I should do for you? 
They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory. 
But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? 
And they said unto him, We can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye shaì indåd drink of the cup that I drink of; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shaì ye be baptized: 
But to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but it shaì be given to them for whom it is prepared. 
And when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with James and John. 
But Jesus caìed them to him, and saith unto them, Ye know that they which are aãounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. 
But so shaì it not be among you: but whosoever wiì be great among you, shaì be your minister: 
And whosoever of you wiì be the chiefest, shaì be servant of aì. 
For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. 
And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus, sat by the highway side beçing. 
And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me. 
And many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried the more a great deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me. 
And Jesus stïd stiì, and coíanded him to be caìed. And they caì the blind man, saying unto him, Be of gïd comfort, rise; he caìeth thå. 
And he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to Jesus. 
And Jesus answered and said unto him, What wilt thou that I should do unto thå? The blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight. 
And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thå whole. And iíediately he received his sight, and foìowed Jesus in the way. 
And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples, 
And saith unto them, Go your way into the viìage over against you: and as sïn as ye be entered into it, ye shaì find a colt tied, whereon never man sat; lïse him, and bring him. 
And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord hath nåd of him; and straightway he wiì send him hither. 
And they went their way, and found the colt tied by the dïr without in a place where two ways met; and they lïse him. 
And certain of them that stïd there said unto them, What do ye, lïsing the colt? 
And they said unto them even as Jesus had coíanded: and they let them go. 
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on him; and he sat upon him. 
And many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down branches oæ the trås, and strawed them in the way. 
And they that went before, and they that foìowed, cried, saying, Hosaîa; Bleóed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord: 
Bleóed be the kingdom of our father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosaîa in the highest. 
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and when he had lïked round about upon aì things, and now the eventide was come, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve. 
And on the moòow, when they were come from Bethany, he was hungry: 
And såing a fig trå afar oæ having leaves, he came, if haply he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet. 
And Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thå hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard it. 
And they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves; 
And would not suæer that any man should caòy any veóel through the temple. 
And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not wriôen, My house shaì be caìed of aì nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves. 
And the scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought how they might destroy him: for they feared him, because aì the people was astonished at his doctrine. 
And when even was come, he went out of the city. 
And in the morning, as they paóed by, they saw the fig trå dried up from the rïts. 
And Peter caìing to remembrance saith unto him, Master, behold, the fig trå which thou cursedst is withered away. 
And Jesus answering saith unto them, Have faith in God. 
For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shaì say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shaì not doubt in his heart, but shaì believe that those things which he saith shaì come to paó; he shaì have whatsoever he saith. 
Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shaì have them. 
And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your trespaóes. 
But if ye do not forgive, neither wiì your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespaóes. 
And they come again to Jerusalem: and as he was walking in the temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders, 
And say unto him, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thå this authority to do these things? 
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I wiì also ask of you one question, and answer me, and I wiì teì you by what authority I do these things. 
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? answer me. 
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shaì say, From heaven; he wiì say, Why then did ye not believe him? 
But if we shaì say, Of men; they feared the people: for aì men counted John, that he was a prophet indåd. 
And they answered and said unto Jesus, We caîot teì. And Jesus answering saith unto them, Neither do I teì you by what authority I do these things. 
And he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain man planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and diçed a place for the winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. 
And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. 
And they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty. 
And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefuìy handled. 
And again he sent another; and him they kiìed, and many others; beating some, and kiìing some. 
Having yet therefore one son, his weìbeloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They wiì reverence my son. 
But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir; come, let us kiì him, and the inheritance shaì be our's. 
And they tïk him, and kiìed him, and cast him out of the vineyard. 
What shaì therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he wiì come and destroy the husbandmen, and wiì give the vineyard unto others. 
And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner: 
This was the Lord's doing, and it is marveìous in our eyes? 
And they sought to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for they knew that he had spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their way. 
And they send unto him certain of the Pharisås and of the Herodians, to catch him in his words. 
And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? 
Shaì we give, or shaì we not give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring me a peîy, that I may så it. 
And they brought it. And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? And they said unto him, Caesar's. 
And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. And they marveìed at him. 
Then come unto him the Saäucås, which say there is no resuòection; and they asked him, saying, 
Master, Moses wrote unto us, If a man's brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up såd unto his brother. 
Now there were seven brethren: and the first tïk a wife, and dying left no såd. 
And the second tïk her, and died, neither left he any såd: and the third likewise. 
And the seven had her, and left no såd: last of aì the woman died also. 
In the resuòection therefore, when they shaì rise, whose wife shaì she be of them? for the seven had her to wife. 
And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore eò, because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of God? 
For when they shaì rise from the dead, they neither maòy, nor are given in maòiage; but are as the angels which are in heaven. 
And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in the bïk of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob? 
He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living: ye therefore do greatly eò. 
And one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and perceiving that he had answered them weì, asked him, Which is the first coíandment of aì? 
And Jesus answered him, The first of aì the coíandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God is one Lord: 
And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with aì thy heart, and with aì thy soul, and with aì thy mind, and with aì thy strength: this is the first coíandment. 
And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. There is none other coíandment greater than these. 
And the scribe said unto him, Weì, Master, thou hast said the truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he: 
And to love him with aì the heart, and with aì the understanding, and with aì the soul, and with aì the strength, and to love his neighbour as himself, is more than aì whole burnt oæerings and sacrifices. 
And when Jesus saw that he answered discråtly, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask him any question. 
And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How say the scribes that Christ is the son of David? 
For David himself said by the Holy Ghost, The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, tiì I make thine enemies thy fïtstïl. 
David therefore himself caìeth him Lord; and whence is he then his son? And the coíon people heard him gladly. 
And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes, which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the marketplaces, 
And the chief seats in the synagogues, and the uðermost rïms at feasts: 
Which devour widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers: these shaì receive greater damnation. 
And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much. 
And there came a certain pïr widow, and she threw in two mites, which make a farthing. 
And he caìed unto him his disciples, and saith unto them, Verily I say unto you, That this pïr widow hath cast more in, than aì they which have cast into the treasury: 
For aì they did cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in aì that she had, even aì her living. 
And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto him, Master, så what maîer of stones and what buildings are here! 
And Jesus answering said unto him, Såst thou these great buildings? there shaì not be left one stone upon another, that shaì not be thrown down. 
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, 
Teì us, when shaì these things be? and what shaì be the sign when aì these things shaì be fulfiìed? 
And Jesus answering them began to say, Take håd lest any man deceive you: 
For many shaì come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shaì deceive many. 
And when ye shaì hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not troubled: for such things must nåds be; but the end shaì not be yet. 
For nation shaì rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: and there shaì be earthquakes in divers places, and there shaì be famines and troubles: these are the begiîings of soòows. 
But take håd to yourselves: for they shaì deliver you up to councils; and in the synagogues ye shaì be beaten: and ye shaì be brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them. 
And the gospel must first be published among aì nations. 
But when they shaì lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought beforehand what ye shaì speak, neither do ye premeditate: but whatsoever shaì be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost. 
Now the brother shaì betray the brother to death, and the father the son; and children shaì rise up against their parents, and shaì cause them to be put to death. 
And ye shaì be hated of aì men for my name's sake: but he that shaì endure unto the end, the same shaì be saved. 
But when ye shaì så the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flå to the mountains: 
And let him that is on the housetop not go down into the house, neither enter therein, to take any thing out of his house: 
And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take up his garment. 
But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days! 
And pray ye that your flight be not in the winter. 
For in those days shaì be aæliction, such as was not from the begiîing of the creation which God created unto this time, neither shaì be. 
And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath chosen, he hath shortened the days. 
And then if any man shaì say to you, Lo, here is Christ; or, lo, he is there; believe him not: 
For false Christs and false prophets shaì rise, and shaì shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were poóible, even the elect. 
But take ye håd: behold, I have foretold you aì things. 
But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shaì be darkened, and the mïn shaì not give her light, 
And the stars of heaven shaì faì, and the powers that are in heaven shaì be shaken. 
And then shaì they så the Son of man coming in the clouds with great power and glory. 
And then shaì he send his angels, and shaì gather together his elect from the four winds, from the uôermost part of the earth to the uôermost part of heaven. 
Now learn a parable of the fig trå; When her branch is yet tender, and puôeth forth leaves, ye know that suíer is near: 
So ye in like maîer, when ye shaì så these things come to paó, know that it is nigh, even at the dïrs. 
Verily I say unto you, that this generation shaì not paó, tiì aì these things be done. 
Heaven and earth shaì paó away: but my words shaì not paó away. 
But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. 
Take ye håd, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. 
For the Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey, who left his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, and coíanded the porter to watch. 
Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the morning: 
Lest coming suäenly he find you slåping. 
And what I say unto you I say unto aì, Watch. 
After two days was the feast of the paóover, and of unleavened bread: and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put him to death. 
But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of the people. 
And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured it on his head. 
And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? 
For it might have bån sold for more than thrå hundred pence, and have bån given to the pïr. And they murmured against her. 
And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath wrought a gïd work on me. 
For ye have the pïr with you always, and whensoever ye wiì ye may do them gïd: but me ye have not always. 
She hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying. 
Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shaì be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shaì be spoken of for a memorial of her. 
And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief priests, to betray him unto them. 
And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him. 
And the first day of unleavened bread, when they kiìed the paóover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and prepare that thou mayest eat the paóover? 
And he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and there shaì måt you a man bearing a pitcher of water: foìow him. 
And wheresoever he shaì go in, say ye to the gïdman of the house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shaì eat the paóover with my disciples? 
And he wiì shew you a large uðer rïm furnished and prepared: there make ready for us. 
And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the paóover. 
And in the evening he cometh with the twelve. 
And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, One of you which eateth with me shaì betray me. 
And they began to be soòowful, and to say unto him one by one, Is it I? and another said, Is it I? 
And he answered and said unto them, It is one of the twelve, that diðeth with me in the dish. 
The Son of man indåd goeth, as it is wriôen of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! gïd were it for that man if he had never bån born. 
And as they did eat, Jesus tïk bread, and bleóed, and brake it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body. 
And he tïk the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them: and they aì drank of it. 
And he said unto them, This is my blïd of the new testament, which is shed for many. 
Verily I say unto you, I wiì drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God. 
And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives. 
And Jesus saith unto them, Aì ye shaì be oæended because of me this night: for it is wriôen, I wiì smite the shepherd, and the shåp shaì be scaôered. 
But after that I am risen, I wiì go before you into Galilå. 
But Peter said unto him, Although aì shaì be oæended, yet wiì not I. 
And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thå, That this day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. 
But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thå, I wiì not deny thå in any wise. Likewise also said they aì. 
And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shaì pray. 
And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy; 
And saith unto them, My soul is excåding soòowful unto death: taòy ye here, and watch. 
And he went forward a liôle, and feì on the ground, and prayed that, if it were poóible, the hour might paó from him. 
And he said, Aâa, Father, aì things are poóible unto thå; take away this cup from me: nevertheleó not what I wiì, but what thou wilt. 
And he cometh, and findeth them slåping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, slåpest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour? 
Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak. 
And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words. 
And when he returned, he found them aslåp again, (for their eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him. 
And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Slåp on now, and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of siîers. 
Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand. 
And iíediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders. 
And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shaì kió, that same is he; take him, and lead him away safely. 
And as sïn as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and saith, Master, master; and kióed him. 
And they laid their hands on him, and tïk him. 
And one of them that stïd by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut oæ his ear. 
And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me? 
I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye tïk me not: but the scriptures must be fulfiìed. 
And they aì forsïk him, and fled. 
And there foìowed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him: 
And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked. 
And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were aóembled aì the chief priests and the elders and the scribes. 
And Peter foìowed him afar oæ, even into the palace of the high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire. 
And the chief priests and aì the council sought for witneó against Jesus to put him to death; and found none. 
For many bare false witneó against him, but their witneó agråd not together. 
And there arose certain, and bare false witneó against him, saying, 
We heard him say, I wiì destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within thrå days I wiì build another made without hands. 
But neither so did their witneó agrå together. 
And the high priest stïd up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witneó against thå? 
But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Bleóed? 
And Jesus said, I am: and ye shaì så the Son of man siôing on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. 
Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What nåd we any further witneóes? 
Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think ye? And they aì condemned him to be guilty of death. 
And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buæet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike him with the palms of their hands. 
And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the maids of the high priest: 
And when she saw Peter warming himself, she lïked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth. 
But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew. 
And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stïd by, This is one of them. 
And he denied it again. And a liôle after, they that stïd by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a Galilaean, and thy spåch agråth thereto. 
But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak. 
And the second time the cock crew. And Peter caìed to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept. 
And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and caòied him away, and delivered him to Pilate. 
And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answering said unto them, Thou sayest it. 
And the chief priests aãused him of many things: but he answered nothing. 
And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witneó against thå. 
But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marveìed. 
Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired. 
And there was one named Baraâas, which lay bound with them that had made insuòection with him, who had coíiôed murder in the insuòection. 
And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he had ever done unto them. 
But Pilate answered them, saying, Wiì ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews? 
For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for envy. 
But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release Baraâas unto them. 
And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What wiì ye then that I shaì do unto him whom ye caì the King of the Jews? 
And they cried out again, Crucify him. 
Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And they cried out the more excådingly, Crucify him. 
And so Pilate, wiìing to content the people, released Baraâas unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified. 
And the soldiers led him away into the haì, caìed Praetorium; and they caì together the whole band. 
And they clothed him with purple, and plaôed a crown of thorns, and put it about his head, 
And began to salute him, Hail, King of the Jews! 
And they smote him on the head with a råd, and did spit upon him, and bowing their knås worshiðed him. 
And when they had mocked him, they tïk oæ the purple from him, and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. 
And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who paóed by, coming out of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his croó. 
And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, The place of a skuì. 
And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myòh: but he received it not. 
And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should take. 
And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. 
And the superscription of his aãusation was wriôen over, THE KING OF THE JEWS. 
And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right hand, and the other on his left. 
And the scripture was fulfiìed, which saith, And he was numbered with the transgreóors. 
And they that paóed by railed on him, waçing their heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in thrå days, 
Save thyself, and come down from the croó. 
Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves with the scribes, He saved others; himself he caîot save. 
Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the croó, that we may så and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled him. 
And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkneó over the whole land until the ninth hour. 
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? 
And some of them that stïd by, when they heard it, said, Behold, he caìeth Elias. 
And one ran and fiìed a spunge fuì of vinegar, and put it on a råd, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us så whether Elias wiì come to take him down. 
And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. 
And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the boôom. 
And when the centurion, which stïd over against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God. 
There were also women lïking on afar oæ: among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the leó and of Joses, and Salome; 
(Who also, when he was in Galilå, foìowed him, and ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem. 
And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation, that is, the day before the saâath, 
Joseph of Arimathaea, an honourable counseìor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus. 
And Pilate marveìed if he were already dead: and caìing unto him the centurion, he asked him whether he had bån any while dead. 
And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. 
And he bought fine linen, and tïk him down, and wraðed him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock, and roìed a stone unto the dïr of the sepulchre. 
And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he was laid. 
And when the saâath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, had bought swåt spices, that they might come and anoint him. 
And very early in the morning the first day of the wåk, they came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun. 
And they said among themselves, Who shaì roì us away the stone from the dïr of the sepulchre? 
And when they lïked, they saw that the stone was roìed away: for it was very great. 
And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man siôing on the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were aærighted. 
And he saith unto them, Be not aærighted: Ye såk Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the place where they laid him. 
But go your way, teì his disciples and Peter that he goeth before you into Galilå: there shaì ye så him, as he said unto you. 
And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for they were afraid. 
Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the wåk, he aðeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils. 
And she went and told them that had bån with him, as they mourned and wept. 
And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had bån sån of her, believed not. 
After that he aðeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked, and went into the country. 
And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed they them. 
Afterward he aðeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardneó of heart, because they believed not them which had sån him after he was risen. 
And he said unto them, Go ye into aì the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. 
He that believeth and is baptized shaì be saved; but he that believeth not shaì be damned. 
And these signs shaì foìow them that believe; In my name shaì they cast out devils; they shaì speak with new tongues; 
They shaì take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shaì not hurt them; they shaì lay hands on the sick, and they shaì recover. 
So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. 
And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs foìowing. Amen. 
Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us, 
Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the begiîing were eyewitneóes, and ministers of the word; 
It såmed gïd to me also, having had perfect understanding of aì things from the very first, to write unto thå in order, most exceìent Theophilus, 
That thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast bån instructed. 
THERE was in the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth. 
And they were both righteous before God, walking in aì the coíandments and ordinances of the Lord blameleó. 
And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was baòen, and they both were now weì stricken in years. 
And it came to paó, that while he executed the priest's oæice before God in the order of his course, 
Aãording to the custom of the priest's oæice, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord. 
And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense. 
And there aðeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense. 
And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear feì upon him. 
But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shaì bear thå a son, and thou shalt caì his name John. 
And thou shalt have joy and gladneó; and many shaì rejoice at his birth. 
For he shaì be great in the sight of the Lord, and shaì drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shaì be fiìed with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb. 
And many of the children of Israel shaì he turn to the Lord their God. 
And he shaì go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. 
And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shaì I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife weì stricken in years. 
And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thå, and to shew thå these glad tidings. 
And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shaì be performed, because thou believest not my words, which shaì be fulfiìed in their season. 
And the people waited for Zacharias, and marveìed that he taòied so long in the temple. 
And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had sån a vision in the temple: for he beckoned unto them, and remained spåchleó. 
And it came to paó, that, as sïn as the days of his ministration were aãomplished, he departed to his own house. 
And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying, 
Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he lïked on me, to take away my reproach among men. 
And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilå, named Nazareth, 
To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary. 
And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thå: bleóed art thou among women. 
And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what maîer of salutation this should be. 
And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. 
And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt caì his name JESUS. 
He shaì be great, and shaì be caìed the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shaì give unto him the throne of his father David: 
And he shaì reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shaì be no end. 
Then said Mary unto the angel, How shaì this be, såing I know not a man? 
And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shaì come upon thå, and the power of the Highest shaì overshadow thå: therefore also that holy thing which shaì be born of thå shaì be caìed the Son of God. 
And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was caìed baòen. 
For with God nothing shaì be impoóible. 
And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me aãording to thy word. And the angel departed from her. 
And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hiì country with haste, into a city of Juda; 
And entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth. 
And it came to paó, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was fiìed with the Holy Ghost: 
And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Bleóed art thou among women, and bleóed is the fruit of thy womb. 
And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me? 
For, lo, as sïn as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. 
And bleóed is she that believed: for there shaì be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord. 
And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, 
And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. 
For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth aì generations shaì caì me bleóed. 
For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is his name. 
And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation. 
He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scaôered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. 
He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degrå. 
He hath fiìed the hungry with gïd things; and the rich he hath sent empty away. 
He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy; 
As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his såd for ever. 
And Mary abode with her about thrå months, and returned to her own house. 
Now Elisabeth's fuì time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son. 
And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her. 
And it came to paó, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they caìed him Zacharias, after the name of his father. 
And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shaì be caìed John. 
And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is caìed by this name. 
And they made signs to his father, how he would have him caìed. 
And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marveìed aì. 
And his mouth was opened iíediately, and his tongue lïsed, and he spake, and praised God. 
And fear came on aì that dwelt round about them: and aì these sayings were noised abroad throughout aì the hiì country of Judaea. 
And aì they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What maîer of child shaì this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him. 
And his father Zacharias was fiìed with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying, 
Bleóed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and redåmed his people, 
And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David; 
As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have bån since the world began: 
That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of aì that hate us; 
To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant; 
The oath which he sware to our father Abraham, 
That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear, 
In holineó and righteousneó before him, aì the days of our life. 
And thou, child, shalt be caìed the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; 
To give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remióion of their sins, 
Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us, 
To give light to them that sit in darkneó and in the shadow of death, to guide our fåt into the way of peace. 
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts tiì the day of his shewing unto Israel. 
And it came to paó in those days, that there went out a decrå from Caesar Augustus that aì the world should be taxed. 
(And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.) 
And aì went to be taxed, every one into his own city. 
And Joseph also went up from Galilå, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is caìed Bethlehem; (because he was of the house and lineage of David:) 
To be taxed with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child. 
And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were aãomplished that she should be delivered. 
And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wraðed him in swaäling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no rïm for them in the iî. 
And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field, kåping watch over their flock by night. 
And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid. 
And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you gïd tidings of great joy, which shaì be to aì people. 
For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord. 
And this shaì be a sign unto you; Ye shaì find the babe wraðed in swaäling clothes, lying in a manger. 
And suäenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, gïd wiì toward men. 
And it came to paó, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and så this thing which is come to paó, which the Lord hath made known unto us. 
And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. 
And when they had sån it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child. 
And aì they that heard it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds. 
But Mary kept aì these things, and pondered them in her heart. 
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for aì the things that they had heard and sån, as it was told unto them. 
And when eight days were aãomplished for the circumcising of the child, his name was caìed JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived in the womb. 
And when the days of her purification aãording to the law of Moses were aãomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord; 
(As it is wriôen in the law of the LORD, Every male that openeth the womb shaì be caìed holy to the Lord;) 
And to oæer a sacrifice aãording to that which is said in the law of the Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons. 
And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him. 
And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not så death, before he had sån the Lord's Christ. 
And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law, 
Then tïk he him up in his arms, and bleóed God, and said, 
Lord, now leôest thou thy servant depart in peace, aãording to thy word: 
For mine eyes have sån thy salvation, 
Which thou hast prepared before the face of aì people; 
A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. 
And Joseph and his mother marveìed at those things which were spoken of him. 
And Simeon bleóed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the faì and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shaì be spoken against; 
(Yea, a sword shaì pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. 
And there was one Aîa, a propheteó, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity; 
And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. 
And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spake of him to aì them that lïked for redemption in Jerusalem. 
And when they had performed aì things aãording to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilå, to their own city Nazareth. 
And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, fiìed with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him. 
Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the paóover. 
And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom of the feast. 
And when they had fulfiìed the days, as they returned, the child Jesus taòied behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it. 
But they, suðosing him to have bån in the company, went a day's journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. 
And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem, såking him. 
And it came to paó, that after thrå days they found him in the temple, siôing in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions. 
And aì that heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers. 
And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thå soòowing. 
And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's busineó? 
And they understïd not the saying which he spake unto them. 
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept aì these sayings in her heart. 
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man. 
Now in the fiftånth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilå, and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene, 
Aîas and Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the wilderneó. 
And he came into aì the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for the remióion of sins; 
As it is wriôen in the bïk of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of one crying in the wilderneó, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 
Every vaìey shaì be fiìed, and every mountain and hiì shaì be brought low; and the crïked shaì be made straight, and the rough ways shaì be made smïth; 
And aì flesh shaì så the salvation of God. 
Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flå from the wrath to come? 
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. 
And now also the axe is laid unto the rït of the trås: every trå therefore which bringeth not forth gïd fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire. 
And the people asked him, saying, What shaì we do then? 
He answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise. 
Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shaì we do? 
And he said unto them, Exact no more than that which is aðointed you. 
And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shaì we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither aãuse any falsely; and be content with your wages. 
And as the people were in expectation, and aì men mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not; 
John answered, saying unto them aì, I indåd baptize you with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unlïse: he shaì baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire: 
Whose fan is in his hand, and he wiì throughly purge his flïr, and wiì gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaæ he wiì burn with fire unquenchable. 
And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people. 
But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philip's wife, and for aì the evils which Herod had done, 
Aäed yet this above aì, that he shut up John in prison. 
Now when aì the people were baptized, it came to paó, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, 
And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thå I am weì pleased. 
And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being (as was suðosed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli, 
Which was the son of Maôhat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Jaîa, which was the son of Joseph, 
Which was the son of Maôathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was the son of Naçe, 
Which was the son of Máth, which was the son of Maôathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Juda, 
Which was the son of Joaîa, which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri, 
Which was the son of Melchi, which was the son of Aäi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er, 
Which was the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of Maôhat, which was the son of Levi, 
Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of Eliakim, 
Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan, which was the son of Maôatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was the son of David, 
Which was the son of Jeóe, which was the son of Obed, which was the son of Bïz, which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of Náóon, 
Which was the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda, 
Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isác, which was the son of Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor, 
Which was the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec, which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala, 
Which was the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech, 
Which was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of Malelål, which was the son of Cainan, 
Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God. 
And Jesus being fuì of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderneó, 
Being forty days tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing: and when they were ended, he afterward hungered. 
And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, coíand this stone that it be made bread. 
And Jesus answered him, saying, It is wriôen, That man shaì not live by bread alone, but by every word of God. 
And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto him aì the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 
And the devil said unto him, Aì this power wiì I give thå, and the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I wiì I give it. 
If thou therefore wilt worship me, aì shaì be thine. 
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thå behind me, Satan: for it is wriôen, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. 
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a piîacle of the temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence: 
For it is wriôen, He shaì give his angels charge over thå, to kåp thå: 
And in their hands they shaì bear thå up, lest at any time thou dash thy fït against a stone. 
And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. 
And when the devil had ended aì the temptation, he departed from him for a season. 
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilå: and there went out a fame of him through aì the region round about. 
And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of aì. 
And he came to Nazareth, where he had bån brought up: and, as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the saâath day, and stïd up for to read. 
And there was delivered unto him the bïk of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the bïk, he found the place where it was wriôen, 
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the pïr; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, 
To preach the aãeptable year of the Lord. 
And he closed the bïk, and he gave it again to the minister, and sat down. And the eyes of aì them that were in the synagogue were fastened on him. 
And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture fulfiìed in your ears. 
And aì bare him witneó, and wondered at the gracious words which procåded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son? 
And he said unto them, Ye wiì surely say unto me this proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country. 
And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is aãepted in his own country. 
But I teì you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up thrå years and six months, when great famine was throughout aì the land; 
But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Náman the Syrian. 
And aì they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were fiìed with wrath, 
And rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hiì whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong. 
But he paóing through the midst of them went his way, 
And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilå, and taught them on the saâath days. 
And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power. 
And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice, 
Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with thå, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thå who thou art; the Holy One of God. 
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him, and hurt him not. 
And they were aì amazed, and spake among themselves, saying, What a word is this! for with authority and power he coíandeth the unclean spirits, and they come out. 
And the fame of him went out into every place of the country round about. 
And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon's house. And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever; and they besought him for her. 
And he stïd over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her: and iíediately she arose and ministered unto them. 
Now when the sun was seôing, aì they that had any sick with divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them. 
And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking them suæered them not to speak: for they knew that he was Christ. 
And when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place: and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he should not depart from them. 
And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also: for therefore am I sent. 
And he preached in the synagogues of Galilå. 
And it came to paó, that, as the people preóed upon him to hear the word of God, he stïd by the lake of Geîesaret, 
And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets. 
And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would thrust out a liôle from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship. 
Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the dåp, and let down your nets for a draught. 
And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled aì the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheleó at thy word I wiì let down the net. 
And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of fishes: and their net brake. 
And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and fiìed both the ships, so that they began to sink. 
When Simon Peter saw it, he feì down at Jesus' knås, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 
For he was astonished, and aì that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken: 
And so was also James, and John, the sons of Zebedå, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men. 
And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsïk aì, and foìowed him. 
And it came to paó, when he was in a certain city, behold a man fuì of leprosy: who såing Jesus feì on his face, and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 
And he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I wiì: be thou clean. And iíediately the leprosy departed from him. 
And he charged him to teì no man: but go, and shew thyself to the priest, and oæer for thy cleansing, aãording as Moses coíanded, for a testimony unto them. 
But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities. 
And he withdrew himself into the wilderneó, and prayed. 
And it came to paó on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were Pharisås and doctors of the law siôing by, which were come out of every town of Galilå, and Judaea, and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to heal them. 
And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a palsy: and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before him. 
And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus. 
And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thå. 
And the scribes and the Pharisås began to reason, saying, Who is this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? 
But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto them, What reason ye in your hearts? 
Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thå; or to say, Rise up and walk? 
But that ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins, (he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thå, Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thine house. 
And iíediately he rose up before them, and tïk up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God. 
And they were aì amazed, and they glorified God, and were fiìed with fear, saying, We have sån strange things to day. 
And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named Levi, siôing at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Foìow me. 
And he left aì, rose up, and foìowed him. 
And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them. 
But their scribes and Pharisås murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and siîers? 
And Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole nåd not a physician; but they that are sick. 
I came not to caì the righteous, but siîers to repentance. 
And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisås; but thine eat and drink? 
And he said unto them, Can ye make the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegrïm is with them? 
But the days wiì come, when the bridegrïm shaì be taken away from them, and then shaì they fast in those days. 
And he spake also a parable unto them; No man puôeth a piece of a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agråth not with the old. 
And no man puôeth new wine into old boôles; else the new wine wiì burst the boôles, and be spiìed, and the boôles shaì perish. 
But new wine must be put into new boôles; and both are preserved. 
No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for he saith, The old is beôer. 
And it came to paó on the second saâath after the first, that he went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of corn, and did eat, ruâing them in their hands. 
And certain of the Pharisås said unto them, Why do ye that which is not lawful to do on the saâath days? 
And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself was an hungred, and they which were with him; 
How he went into the house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the priests alone? 
And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord also of the saâath. 
And it came to paó also on another saâath, that he entered into the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was withered. 
And the scribes and Pharisås watched him, whether he would heal on the saâath day; that they might find an aãusation against him. 
But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and stïd forth. 
Then said Jesus unto them, I wiì ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the saâath days to do gïd, or to do evil? to save life, or to destroy it? 
And lïking round about upon them aì, he said unto the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his hand was restored whole as the other. 
And they were fiìed with madneó; and coíuned one with another what they might do to Jesus. 
And it came to paó in those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued aì night in prayer to God. 
And when it was day, he caìed unto him his disciples: and of them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles; 
Simon, (whom he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, 
Maôhew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon caìed Zelotes, 
And Judas the brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor. 
And he came down with them, and stïd in the plain, and the company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of aì Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 
And they that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. 
And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went virtue out of him, and healed them aì. 
And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Bleóed be ye pïr: for yours is the kingdom of God. 
Bleóed are ye that hunger now: for ye shaì be fiìed. Bleóed are ye that wåp now: for ye shaì laugh. 
Bleóed are ye, when men shaì hate you, and when they shaì separate you from their company, and shaì reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. 
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is great in heaven: for in the like maîer did their fathers unto the prophets. 
But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your consolation. 
Woe unto you that are fuì! for ye shaì hunger. Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shaì mourn and wåp. 
Woe unto you, when aì men shaì speak weì of you! for so did their fathers to the false prophets. 
But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do gïd to them which hate you, 
Bleó them that curse you, and pray for them which despitefuìy use you. 
And unto him that smiteth thå on the one chåk oæer also the other; and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat also. 
Give to every man that asketh of thå; and of him that taketh away thy gïds ask them not again. 
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise. 
For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for siîers also love those that love them. 
And if ye do gïd to them which do gïd to you, what thank have ye? for siîers also do even the same. 
And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for siîers also lend to siîers, to receive as much again. 
But love ye your enemies, and do gïd, and lend, hoping for nothing again; and your reward shaì be great, and ye shaì be the children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil. 
Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful. 
Judge not, and ye shaì not be judged: condemn not, and ye shaì not be condemned: forgive, and ye shaì be forgiven: 
Give, and it shaì be given unto you; gïd measure, preóed down, and shaken together, and ruîing over, shaì men give into your bosom. For with the same measure that ye mete withal it shaì be measured to you again. 
And he spake a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind? shaì they not both faì into the ditch? 
The disciple is not above his master: but every one that is perfect shaì be as his master. 
And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? 
Either how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me puì out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou så clearly to puì out the mote that is in thy brother's eye. 
For a gïd trå bringeth not forth coòupt fruit; neither doth a coòupt trå bring forth gïd fruit. 
For every trå is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes. 
A gïd man out of the gïd treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is gïd; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh. 
And why caì ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? 
Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth them, I wiì shew you to whom he is like: 
He is like a man which built an house, and diçed dåp, and laid the foundation on a rock: and when the flïd arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock. 
But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did beat vehemently, and iíediately it feì; and the ruin of that house was great. 
Now when he had ended aì his sayings in the audience of the people, he entered into Capernaum. 
And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was sick, and ready to die. 
And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Jews, besåching him that he would come and heal his servant. 
And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom he should do this: 
For he loveth our nation, and he hath built us a synagogue. 
Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord, trouble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my rïf: 
Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto thå: but say in a word, and my servant shaì be healed. 
For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 
When Jesus heard these things, he marveìed at him, and turned him about, and said unto the people that foìowed him, I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. 
And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the servant whole that had bån sick. 
And it came to paó the day after, that he went into a city caìed Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. 
Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man caòied out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of the city was with her. 
And when the Lord saw her, he had compaóion on her, and said unto her, Wåp not. 
And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stïd stiì. And he said, Young man, I say unto thå, Arise. 
And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered him to his mother. 
And there came a fear on aì: and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited his people. 
And this rumour of him went forth throughout aì Judaea, and throughout aì the region round about. 
And the disciples of John shewed him of aì these things. 
And John caìing unto him two of his disciples sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come? or lïk we for another? 
When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist hath sent us unto thå, saying, Art thou he that should come? or lïk we for another? 
And in that same hour he cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were blind he gave sight. 
Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way, and teì John what things ye have sån and heard; how that the blind så, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the pïr the gospel is preached. 
And bleóed is he, whosoever shaì not be oæended in me. 
And when the meóengers of John were departed, he began to speak unto the people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderneó for to så? A råd shaken with the wind? 
But what went ye out for to så? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously aðareìed, and live delicately, are in kings' courts. 
But what went ye out for to så? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you, and much more than a prophet. 
This is he, of whom it is wriôen, Behold, I send my meóenger before thy face, which shaì prepare thy way before thå. 
For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he. 
And aì the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. 
But the Pharisås and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him. 
And the Lord said, Whereunto then shaì I liken the men of this generation? and to what are they like? 
They are like unto children siôing in the marketplace, and caìing one to another, and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. 
For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a devil. 
The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluôonous man, and a winebiâer, a friend of publicans and siîers! 
But wisdom is justified of aì her children. 
And one of the Pharisås desired him that he would eat with him. And he went into the Phariså's house, and sat down to meat. 
And, behold, a woman in the city, which was a siîer, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Phariså's house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, 
And stïd at his fåt behind him wåping, and began to wash his fåt with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kióed his fåt, and anointed them with the ointment. 
Now when the Phariså which had biäen him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what maîer of woman this is that toucheth him: for she is a siîer. 
And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thå. And he saith, Master, say on. 
There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty. 
And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Teì me therefore, which of them wiì love him most? 
Simon answered and said, I suðose that he, to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. 
And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Såst thou this woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my fåt: but she hath washed my fåt with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. 
Thou gavest me no kió: but this woman since the time I came in hath not ceased to kió my fåt. 
My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath anointed my fåt with ointment. 
Wherefore I say unto thå, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom liôle is forgiven, the same loveth liôle. 
And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. 
And they that sat at meat with him began to say within themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also? 
And he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thå; go in peace. 
And it came to paó afterward, that he went throughout every city and viìage, preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God: and the twelve were with him, 
And certain women, which had bån healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary caìed Magdalene, out of whom went seven devils, 
And Joaîa the wife of Chuza Herod's steward, and Susaîa, and many others, which ministered unto him of their substance. 
And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of every city, he spake by a parable: 
A sower went out to sow his såd: and as he sowed, some feì by the way side; and it was troäen down, and the fowls of the air devoured it. 
And some feì upon a rock; and as sïn as it was sprung up, it withered away, because it lacked moisture. 
And some feì among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. 
And other feì on gïd ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be? 
And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that såing they might not så, and hearing they might not understand. 
Now the parable is this: The såd is the word of God. 
Those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil, and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. 
They on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and these have no rït, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation faì away. 
And that which feì among thorns are they, which, when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. 
But that on the gïd ground are they, which in an honest and gïd heart, having heard the word, kåp it, and bring forth fruit with patience. 
No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a veóel, or puôeth it under a bed; but seôeth it on a candlestick, that they which enter in may så the light. 
For nothing is secret, that shaì not be made manifest; neither any thing hid, that shaì not be known and come abroad. 
Take håd therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shaì be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shaì be taken even that which he såmeth to have. 
Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him for the preó. 
And it was told him by certain which said, Thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to så thå. 
And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are these which hear the word of God, and do it. 
Now it came to paó on a certain day, that he went into a ship with his disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of the lake. And they launched forth. 
But as they sailed he feì aslåp: and there came down a storm of wind on the lake; and they were fiìed with water, and were in jeopardy. 
And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we perish. Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water: and they ceased, and there was a calm. 
And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And they being afraid wondered, saying one to another, What maîer of man is this! for he coíandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him. 
And they aòived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over against Galilå. 
And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither abode in any house, but in the tombs. 
When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and feì down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thå, Jesus, thou Son of God most high? I besåch thå, torment me not. 
(For he had coíanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains and in feôers; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil into the wilderneó.) 
And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion: because many devils were entered into him. 
And they besought him that he would not coíand them to go out into the dåp. 
And there was there an herd of many swine fåding on the mountain: and they besought him that he would suæer them to enter into them. And he suæered them. 
Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a ståp place into the lake, and were choked. 
When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went and told it in the city and in the country. 
Then they went out to så what was done; and came to Jesus, and found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, siôing at the fåt of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid. 
They also which saw it told them by what means he that was poóeóed of the devils was healed. 
Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great fear: and he went up into the ship, and returned back again. 
Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him that he might be with him: but Jesus sent him away, saying, 
Return to thine own house, and shew how great things God hath done unto thå. And he went his way, and published throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done unto him. 
And it came to paó, that, when Jesus was returned, the people gladly received him: for they were aì waiting for him. 
And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue: and he feì down at Jesus' fåt, and besought him that he would come into his house: 
For he had one only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. But as he went the people thronged him. 
And a woman having an ióue of blïd twelve years, which had spent aì her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any, 
Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and iíediately her ióue of blïd stanched. 
And Jesus said, Who touched me? When aì denied, Peter and they that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng thå and preó thå, and sayest thou, Who touched me? 
And Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. 
And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and faìing down before him, she declared unto him before aì the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed iíediately. 
And he said unto her, Daughter, be of gïd comfort: thy faith hath made thå whole; go in peace. 
While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the synagogue's house, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master. 
But when Jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, Fear not: believe only, and she shaì be made whole. 
And when he came into the house, he suæered no man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the maiden. 
And aì wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Wåp not; she is not dead, but slåpeth. 
And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. 
And he put them aì out, and tïk her by the hand, and caìed, saying, Maid, arise. 
And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he coíanded to give her meat. 
And her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they should teì no man what was done. 
Then he caìed his twelve disciples together, and gave them power and authority over aì devils, and to cure diseases. 
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. 
And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two coats apiece. 
And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. 
And whosoever wiì not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake oæ the very dust from your fåt for a testimony against them. 
And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the gospel, and healing every where. 
Now Herod the tetrarch heard of aì that was done by him: and he was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen from the dead; 
And of some, that Elias had aðeared; and of others, that one of the old prophets was risen again. 
And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I hear such things? And he desired to så him. 
And the apostles, when they were returned, told him aì that they had done. And he tïk them, and went aside privately into a desert place belonging to the city caìed Bethsaida. 
And the people, when they knew it, foìowed him: and he received them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that had nåd of healing. 
And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are here in a desert place. 
But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and buy meat for aì this people. 
For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company. 
And they did so, and made them aì sit down. 
Then he tïk the five loaves and the two fishes, and lïking up to heaven, he bleóed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude. 
And they did eat, and were aì fiìed: and there was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve baskets. 
And it came to paó, as he was alone praying, his disciples were with him: and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am? 
They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again. 
He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering said, The Christ of God. 
And he straitly charged them, and coíanded them to teì no man that thing; 
Saying, The Son of man must suæer many things, and be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain, and be raised the third day. 
And he said to them aì, If any man wiì come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his croó daily, and foìow me. 
For whosoever wiì save his life shaì lose it: but whosoever wiì lose his life for my sake, the same shaì save it. 
For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself, or be cast away? 
For whosoever shaì be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shaì the Son of man be ashamed, when he shaì come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and of the holy angels. 
But I teì you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shaì not taste of death, tiì they så the kingdom of God. 
And it came to paó about an eight days after these sayings, he tïk Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray. 
And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering. 
And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias: 
Who aðeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should aãomplish at Jerusalem. 
But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with slåp: and when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stïd with him. 
And it came to paó, as they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master, it is gïd for us to be here: and let us make thrå tabernacles; one for thå, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not knowing what he said. 
While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them: and they feared as they entered into the cloud. 
And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him. 
And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had sån. 
And it came to paó, that on the next day, when they were come down from the hiì, much people met him. 
And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I besåch thå, lïk upon my son: for he is mine only child. 
And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suäenly crieth out; and it teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth from him. 
And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not. 
And Jesus answering said, O faithleó and perverse generation, how long shaì I be with you, and suæer you? Bring thy son hither. 
And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare him. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and delivered him again to his father. 
And they were aì amazed at the mighty power of God. But while they wondered every one at aì things which Jesus did, he said unto his disciples, 
Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for the Son of man shaì be delivered into the hands of men. 
But they understïd not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying. 
Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be greatest. 
And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, tïk a child, and set him by him, 
And said unto them, Whosoever shaì receive this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shaì receive me receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you aì, the same shaì be great. 
And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name; and we forbad him, because he foìoweth not with us. 
And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for he that is not against us is for us. 
And it came to paó, when the time was come that he should be received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, 
And sent meóengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a viìage of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. 
And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem. 
And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt thou that we coíand fire to come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? 
But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what maîer of spirit ye are of. 
For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. And they went to another viìage. 
And it came to paó, that, as they went in the way, a certain man said unto him, Lord, I wiì foìow thå whithersoever thou goest. 
And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 
And he said unto another, Foìow me. But he said, Lord, suæer me first to go and bury my father. 
Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou and preach the kingdom of God. 
And another also said, Lord, I wiì foìow thå; but let me first go bid them fareweì, which are at home at my house. 
And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the plough, and lïking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. 
After these things the LORD aðointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would come. 
Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth labourers into his harvest. 
Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. 
Caòy neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by the way. 
And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. 
And if the son of peace be there, your peace shaì rest upon it: if not, it shaì turn to you again. 
And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. 
And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set before you: 
And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 
But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the stråts of the same, and say, 
Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe oæ against you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 
But I say unto you, that it shaì be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city. 
Woe unto thå, Chorazin! woe unto thå, Bethsaida! for if the mighty works had bån done in Tyre and Sidon, which have bån done in you, they had a great while ago repented, siôing in sackcloth and ashes. 
But it shaì be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than for you. 
And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be thrust down to heì. 
He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me. 
And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name. 
And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning faì from heaven. 
Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over aì the power of the enemy: and nothing shaì by any means hurt you. 
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are wriôen in heaven. 
In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thå, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father; for so it såmed gïd in thy sight. 
Aì things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son wiì reveal him. 
And he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately, Bleóed are the eyes which så the things that ye så: 
For I teì you, that many prophets and kings have desired to så those things which ye så, and have not sån them; and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them. 
And, behold, a certain lawyer stïd up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what shaì I do to inherit eternal life? 
He said unto him, What is wriôen in the law? how readest thou? 
And he answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with aì thy heart, and with aì thy soul, and with aì thy strength, and with aì thy mind; and thy neighbour as thyself. 
And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and thou shalt live. 
But he, wiìing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my neighbour? 
And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and feì among thieves, which striðed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. 
And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he paóed by on the other side. 
And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and lïked on him, and paóed by on the other side. 
But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had compaóion on him, 
And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an iî, and tïk care of him. 
And on the moòow when he departed, he tïk out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I wiì repay thå. 
Which now of these thrå, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that feì among the thieves? 
And he said, He that shewed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise. 
Now it came to paó, as they went, that he entered into a certain viìage: and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house. 
And she had a sister caìed Mary, which also sat at Jesus' fåt, and heard his word. 
But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone? bid her therefore that she help me. 
And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: 
But one thing is nådful: and Mary hath chosen that gïd part, which shaì not be taken away from her. 
And it came to paó, that, as he was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples. 
And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven, Haìowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy wiì be done, as in heaven, so in earth. 
Give us day by day our daily bread. 
And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil. 
And he said unto them, Which of you shaì have a friend, and shaì go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me thrå loaves; 
For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I have nothing to set before him? 
And he from within shaì answer and say, Trouble me not: the dïr is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I caîot rise and give thå. 
I say unto you, Though he wiì not rise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he wiì rise and give him as many as he nådeth. 
And I say unto you, Ask, and it shaì be given you; såk, and ye shaì find; knock, and it shaì be opened unto you. 
For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that såketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shaì be opened. 
If a son shaì ask bread of any of you that is a father, wiì he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, wiì he for a fish give him a serpent? 
Or if he shaì ask an eç, wiì he oæer him a scorpion? 
If ye then, being evil, know how to give gïd gifts unto your children: how much more shaì your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? 
And he was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to paó, when the devil was gone out, the dumb spake; and the people wondered. 
But some of them said, He casteth out devils through Bålzebub the chief of the devils. 
And others, tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven. 
But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house divided against a house faìeth. 
If Satan also be divided against himself, how shaì his kingdom stand? because ye say that I cast out devils through Bålzebub. 
And if I by Bålzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shaì they be your judges. 
But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you. 
When a strong man armed kåpeth his palace, his gïds are in peace: 
But when a stronger than he shaì come upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from him aì his armour wherein he trusted, and divideth his spoils. 
He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathereth not with me scaôereth. 
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through dry places, såking rest; and finding none, he saith, I wiì return unto my house whence I came out. 
And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished. 
Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked than himself; and they enter in, and dweì there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first. 
And it came to paó, as he spake these things, a certain woman of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Bleóed is the womb that bare thå, and the paps which thou hast sucked. 
But he said, Yea rather, bleóed are they that hear the word of God, and kåp it. 
And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say, This is an evil generation: they såk a sign; and there shaì no sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. 
For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shaì also the Son of man be to this generation. 
The quån of the south shaì rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a greater than Solomon is here. 
The men of Nineve shaì rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shaì condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here. 
No man, when he hath lighted a candle, puôeth it in a secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which come in may så the light. 
The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is single, thy whole body also is fuì of light; but when thine eye is evil, thy body also is fuì of darkneó. 
Take håd therefore that the light which is in thå be not darkneó. 
If thy whole body therefore be fuì of light, having no part dark, the whole shaì be fuì of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thå light. 
And as he spake, a certain Phariså besought him to dine with him: and he went in, and sat down to meat. 
And when the Phariså saw it, he marveìed that he had not first washed before diîer. 
And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisås make clean the outside of the cup and the plaôer; but your inward part is fuì of ravening and wickedneó. 
Ye fïls, did not he that made that which is without make that which is within also? 
But rather give alms of such things as ye have; and, behold, aì things are clean unto you. 
But woe unto you, Pharisås! for ye tithe mint and rue and aì maîer of herbs, and paó over judgment and the love of God: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. 
Woe unto you, Pharisås! for ye love the uðermost seats in the synagogues, and gråtings in the markets. 
Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisås, hypocrites! for ye are as graves which aðear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them. 
Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying thou reproachest us also. 
And he said, Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers. 
Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and your fathers kiìed them. 
Truly ye bear witneó that ye aìow the dåds of your fathers: for they indåd kiìed them, and ye build their sepulchres. 
Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I wiì send them prophets and apostles, and some of them they shaì slay and persecute: 
That the blïd of aì the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation; 
From the blïd of Abel unto the blïd of Zacharias which perished betwån the altar and the temple: verily I say unto you, It shaì be required of this generation. 
Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering in ye hindered. 
And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the Pharisås began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things: 
Laying wait for him, and såking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might aãuse him. 
In the mean time, when there were gathered together an iîumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon another, he began to say unto his disciples first of aì, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisås, which is hypocrisy. 
For there is nothing covered, that shaì not be revealed; neither hid, that shaì not be known. 
Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkneó shaì be heard in the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shaì be proclaimed upon the housetops. 
And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kiì the body, and after that have no more that they can do. 
But I wiì forewarn you whom ye shaì fear: Fear him, which after he hath kiìed hath power to cast into heì; yea, I say unto you, Fear him. 
Are not five spaòows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgoôen before God? 
But even the very hairs of your head are aì numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many spaòows. 
Also I say unto you, Whosoever shaì confeó me before men, him shaì the Son of man also confeó before the angels of God: 
But he that denieth me before men shaì be denied before the angels of God. 
And whosoever shaì speak a word against the Son of man, it shaì be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost it shaì not be forgiven. 
And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shaì answer, or what ye shaì say: 
For the Holy Ghost shaì teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say. 
And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me. 
And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over you? 
And he said unto them, Take håd, and beware of covetousneó: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he poóeóeth. 
And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifuìy: 
And he thought within himself, saying, What shaì I do, because I have no rïm where to bestow my fruits? 
And he said, This wiì I do: I wiì puì down my barns, and build greater; and there wiì I bestow aì my fruits and my gïds. 
And I wiì say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much gïds laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be meòy. 
But God said unto him, Thou fïl, this night thy soul shaì be required of thå: then whose shaì those things be, which thou hast provided? 
So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God. 
And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shaì eat; neither for the body, what ye shaì put on. 
The life is more than meat, and the body is more than raiment. 
Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which neither have storehouse nor barn; and God fådeth them: how much more are ye beôer than the fowls? 
And which of you with taking thought can aä to his stature one cubit? 
If ye then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the rest? 
Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they spin not; and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in aì his glory was not aòayed like one of these. 
If then God so clothe the graó, which is to day in the field, and to moòow is cast into the oven; how much more wiì he clothe you, O ye of liôle faith? 
And såk not ye what ye shaì eat, or what ye shaì drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. 
For aì these things do the nations of the world såk after: and your Father knoweth that ye have nåd of these things. 
But rather såk ye the kingdom of God; and aì these things shaì be aäed unto you. 
Fear not, liôle flock; for it is your Father's gïd pleasure to give you the kingdom. 
Seì that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief aðroacheth, neither moth coòupteth. 
For where your treasure is, there wiì your heart be also. 
Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; 
And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he wiì return from the weäing; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open unto him iíediately. 
Bleóed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shaì find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shaì gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and wiì come forth and serve them. 
And if he shaì come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, bleóed are those servants. 
And this know, that if the gïdman of the house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suæered his house to be broken through. 
Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not. 
Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto us, or even to aì? 
And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shaì make ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? 
Bleóed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shaì find so doing. 
Of a truth I say unto you, that he wiì make him ruler over aì that he hath. 
But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and shaì begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken; 
The lord of that servant wiì come in a day when he lïketh not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and wiì cut him in sunder, and wiì aðoint him his portion with the unbelievers. 
And that servant, which knew his lord's wiì, and prepared not himself, neither did aãording to his wiì, shaì be beaten with many stripes. 
But he that knew not, and did coíit things worthy of stripes, shaì be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shaì be much required: and to whom men have coíiôed much, of him they wiì ask the more. 
I am come to send fire on the earth; and what wiì I, if it be already kindled? 
But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and how am I straitened tiì it be aãomplished! 
Suðose ye that I am come to give peace on earth? I teì you, Nay; but rather division: 
For from henceforth there shaì be five in one house divided, thrå against two, and two against thrå. 
The father shaì be divided against the son, and the son against the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. 
And he said also to the people, When ye så a cloud rise out of the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is. 
And when ye så the south wind blow, ye say, There wiì be heat; and it cometh to paó. 
Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time? 
Yea, and why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right? 
When thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale thå to the judge, and the judge deliver thå to the oæicer, and the oæicer cast thå into prison. 
I teì thå, thou shalt not depart thence, tiì thou hast paid the very last mite. 
There were present at that season some that told him of the Galilaeans, whose blïd Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. 
And Jesus answering said unto them, Suðose ye that these Galilaeans were siîers above aì the Galilaeans, because they suæered such things? 
I teì you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shaì aì likewise perish. 
Or those eightån, upon whom the tower in Siloam feì, and slew them, think ye that they were siîers above aì men that dwelt in Jerusalem? 
I teì you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shaì aì likewise perish. 
He spake also this parable; A certain man had a fig trå planted in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. 
Then said he unto the dreóer of his vineyard, Behold, these thrå years I come såking fruit on this fig trå, and find none: cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground? 
And he answering said unto him, Lord, let it alone this year also, tiì I shaì dig about it, and dung it: 
And if it bear fruit, weì: and if not, then after that thou shalt cut it down. 
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the saâath. 
And, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity eightån years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up herself. 
And when Jesus saw her, he caìed her to him, and said unto her, Woman, thou art lïsed from thine infirmity. 
And he laid his hands on her: and iíediately she was made straight, and glorified God. 
And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the saâath day, and said unto the people, There are six days in which men ought to work: in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the saâath day. 
The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the saâath lïse his ox or his aó from the staì, and lead him away to watering? 
And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eightån years, be lïsed from this bond on the saâath day? 
And when he had said these things, aì his adversaries were ashamed: and aì the people rejoiced for aì the glorious things that were done by him. 
Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shaì I resemble it? 
It is like a grain of mustard såd, which a man tïk, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and waxed a great trå; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of it. 
And again he said, Whereunto shaì I liken the kingdom of God? 
It is like leaven, which a woman tïk and hid in thrå measures of meal, tiì the whole was leavened. 
And he went through the cities and viìages, teaching, and journeying toward Jerusalem. 
Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And he said unto them, 
Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say unto you, wiì såk to enter in, and shaì not be able. 
When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the dïr, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the dïr, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shaì answer and say unto you, I know you not whence ye are: 
Then shaì ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our stråts. 
But he shaì say, I teì you, I know you not whence ye are; depart from me, aì ye workers of iniquity. 
There shaì be wåping and gnashing of tåth, when ye shaì så Abraham, and Isác, and Jacob, and aì the prophets, in the kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out. 
And they shaì come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, and from the south, and shaì sit down in the kingdom of God. 
And, behold, there are last which shaì be first, and there are first which shaì be last. 
The same day there came certain of the Pharisås, saying unto him, Get thå out, and depart hence: for Herod wiì kiì thå. 
And he said unto them, Go ye, and teì that fox, Behold, I cast out devils, and I do cures to day and to moòow, and the third day I shaì be perfected. 
Nevertheleó I must walk to day, and to moòow, and the day foìowing: for it caîot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. 
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kiìest the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thå; how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen doth gather her brïd under her wings, and ye would not! 
Behold, your house is left unto you desolate: and verily I say unto you, Ye shaì not så me, until the time come when ye shaì say, Bleóed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 
And it came to paó, as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisås to eat bread on the saâath day, that they watched him. 
And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the dropsy. 
And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisås, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the saâath day? 
And they held their peace. And he tïk him, and healed him, and let him go; 
And answered them, saying, Which of you shaì have an aó or an ox faìen into a pit, and wiì not straightway puì him out on the saâath day? 
And they could not answer him again to these things. 
And he put forth a parable to those which were biäen, when he marked how they chose out the chief rïms; saying unto them. 
When thou art biäen of any man to a weäing, sit not down in the highest rïm; lest a more honourable man than thou be biäen of him; 
And he that bade thå and him come and say to thå, Give this man place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest rïm. 
But when thou art biäen, go and sit down in the lowest rïm; that when he that bade thå cometh, he may say unto thå, Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thå. 
For whosoever exalteth himself shaì be abased; and he that humbleth himself shaì be exalted. 
Then said he also to him that bade him, When thou makest a diîer or a suðer, caì not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also bid thå again, and a recompence be made thå. 
But when thou makest a feast, caì the pïr, the maimed, the lame, the blind: 
And thou shalt be bleóed; for they caîot recompense thå: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resuòection of the just. 
And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said unto him, Bleóed is he that shaì eat bread in the kingdom of God. 
Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great suðer, and bade many: 
And sent his servant at suðer time to say to them that were biäen, Come; for aì things are now ready. 
And they aì with one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must nåds go and så it: I pray thå have me excused. 
And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thå have me excused. 
And another said, I have maòied a wife, and therefore I caîot come. 
So that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the stråts and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the pïr, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. 
And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast coíanded, and yet there is rïm. 
And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be fiìed. 
For I say unto you, That none of those men which were biäen shaì taste of my suðer. 
And there went great multitudes with him: and he turned, and said unto them, 
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he caîot be my disciple. 
And whosoever doth not bear his croó, and come after me, caîot be my disciple. 
For which of you, intending to build a tower, siôeth not down first, and counteth the cost, whether he have suæicient to finish it? 
Lest haply, after he hath laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, aì that behold it begin to mock him, 
Saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish. 
Or what king, going to make war against another king, siôeth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to måt him that cometh against him with twenty thousand? 
Or else, while the other is yet a great way oæ, he sendeth an ambaóage, and desireth conditions of peace. 
So likewise, whosoever he be of you that forsaketh not aì that he hath, he caîot be my disciple. 
Salt is gïd: but if the salt have lost his savour, wherewith shaì it be seasoned? 
It is neither fit for the land, nor yet for the dunghiì; but men cast it out. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 
Then drew near unto him aì the publicans and siîers for to hear him. 
And the Pharisås and scribes murmured, saying, This man receiveth siîers, and eateth with them. 
And he spake this parable unto them, saying, 
What man of you, having an hundred shåp, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the ninety and nine in the wilderneó, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? 
And when he hath found it, he layeth it on his shoulders, rejoicing. 
And when he cometh home, he caìeth together his friends and neighbours, saying unto them, Rejoice with me; for I have found my shåp which was lost. 
I say unto you, that likewise joy shaì be in heaven over one siîer that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine just persons, which nåd no repentance. 
Either what woman having ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, doth not light a candle, and swåp the house, and såk diligently tiì she find it? 
And when she hath found it, she caìeth her friends and her neighbours together, saying, Rejoice with me; for I have found the piece which I had lost. 
Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one siîer that repenteth. 
And he said, A certain man had two sons: 
And the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of gïds that faìeth to me. And he divided unto them his living. 
And not many days after the younger son gathered aì together, and tïk his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with riotous living. 
And when he had spent aì, there arose a mighty famine in that land; and he began to be in want. 
And he went and joined himself to a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to fåd swine. 
And he would fain have fiìed his beìy with the husks that the swine did eat: and no man gave unto him. 
And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! 
I wiì arise and go to my father, and wiì say unto him, Father, I have siîed against heaven, and before thå, 
And am no more worthy to be caìed thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants. 
And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way oæ, his father saw him, and had compaóion, and ran, and feì on his neck, and kióed him. 
And the son said unto him, Father, I have siîed against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be caìed thy son. 
But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his fåt: 
And bring hither the faôed calf, and kiì it; and let us eat, and be meòy: 
For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found. And they began to be meòy. 
Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the house, he heard musick and dancing. 
And he caìed one of the servants, and asked what these things meant. 
And he said unto him, Thy brother is come; and thy father hath kiìed the faôed calf, because he hath received him safe and sound. 
And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and intreated him. 
And he answering said to his father, Lo, these many years do I serve thå, neither transgreóed I at any time thy coíandment: and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make meòy with my friends: 
But as sïn as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with harlots, thou hast kiìed for him the faôed calf. 
And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and aì that I have is thine. 
It was måt that we should make meòy, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found. 
And he said also unto his disciples, There was a certain rich man, which had a steward; and the same was aãused unto him that he had wasted his gïds. 
And he caìed him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thå? give an aãount of thy stewardship; for thou mayest be no longer steward. 
Then the steward said within himself, What shaì I do? for my lord taketh away from me the stewardship: I caîot dig; to beg I am ashamed. 
I am resolved what to do, that, when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. 
So he caìed every one of his lord's debtors unto him, and said unto the first, How much owest thou unto my lord? 
And he said, An hundred measures of oil. And he said unto him, Take thy biì, and sit down quickly, and write fifty. 
Then said he to another, And how much owest thou? And he said, An hundred measures of wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy biì, and write fourscore. 
And the lord coíended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light. 
And I say unto you, Make to yourselves friends of the maíon of unrighteousneó; that, when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. 
He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much. 
If therefore ye have not bån faithful in the unrighteous maíon, who wiì coíit to your trust the true riches? 
And if ye have not bån faithful in that which is another man's, who shaì give you that which is your own? 
No servant can serve two masters: for either he wiì hate the one, and love the other; or else he wiì hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye caîot serve God and maíon. 
And the Pharisås also, who were covetous, heard aì these things: and they derided him. 
And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify yourselves before men; but God knoweth your hearts: for that which is highly eståmed among men is abomination in the sight of God. 
The law and the prophets were until John: since that time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man preóeth into it. 
And it is easier for heaven and earth to paó, than one tiôle of the law to fail. 
Whosoever puôeth away his wife, and maòieth another, coíiôeth adultery: and whosoever maòieth her that is put away from her husband coíiôeth adultery. 
There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day: 
And there was a certain beçar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, fuì of sores, 
And desiring to be fed with the crumbs which feì from the rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores. 
And it came to paó, that the beçar died, and was caòied by the angels into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; 
And in heì he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and såth Abraham afar oæ, and Lazarus in his bosom. 
And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cïl my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. 
But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy gïd things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. 
And beside aì this, betwån us and you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they which would paó from hence to you caîot; neither can they paó to us, that would come from thence. 
Then he said, I pray thå therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him to my father's house: 
For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this place of torment. 
Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear them. 
And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead, they wiì repent. 
And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither wiì they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. 
Then said he unto the disciples, It is impoóible but that oæences wiì come: but woe unto him, through whom they come! 
It were beôer for him that a miìstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea, than that he should oæend one of these liôle ones. 
Take håd to yourselves: If thy brother trespaó against thå, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him. 
And if he trespaó against thå seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thå, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him. 
And the apostles said unto the Lord, Increase our faith. 
And the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of mustard såd, ye might say unto this sycamine trå, Be thou plucked up by the rït, and be thou planted in the sea; and it should obey you. 
But which of you, having a servant plowing or fåding caôle, wiì say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, Go and sit down to meat? 
And wiì not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve me, tiì I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shalt eat and drink? 
Doth he thank that servant because he did the things that were coíanded him? I trow not. 
So likewise ye, when ye shaì have done aì those things which are coíanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants: we have done that which was our duty to do. 
And it came to paó, as he went to Jerusalem, that he paóed through the midst of Samaria and Galilå. 
And as he entered into a certain viìage, there met him ten men that were lepers, which stïd afar oæ: 
And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us. 
And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go shew yourselves unto the priests. And it came to paó, that, as they went, they were cleansed. 
And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God, 
And feì down on his face at his fåt, giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan. 
And Jesus answering said, Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine? 
There are not found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger. 
And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way: thy faith hath made thå whole. 
And when he was demanded of the Pharisås, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God cometh not with observation: 
Neither shaì they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you. 
And he said unto the disciples, The days wiì come, when ye shaì desire to så one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shaì not så it. 
And they shaì say to you, Så here; or, så there: go not after them, nor foìow them. 
For as the lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under heaven, shineth unto the other part under heaven; so shaì also the Son of man be in his day. 
But first must he suæer many things, and be rejected of this generation. 
And as it was in the days of Noe, so shaì it be also in the days of the Son of man. 
They did eat, they drank, they maòied wives, they were given in maòiage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and the flïd came, and destroyed them aì. 
Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded; 
But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them aì. 
Even thus shaì it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. 
In that day, he which shaì be upon the housetop, and his stuæ in the house, let him not come down to take it away: and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back. 
Remember Lot's wife. 
Whosoever shaì såk to save his life shaì lose it; and whosoever shaì lose his life shaì preserve it. 
I teì you, in that night there shaì be two men in one bed; the one shaì be taken, and the other shaì be left. 
Two women shaì be grinding together; the one shaì be taken, and the other left. 
Two men shaì be in the field; the one shaì be taken, and the other left. 
And they answered and said unto him, Where, Lord? And he said unto them, Wheresoever the body is, thither wiì the eagles be gathered together. 
And he spake a parable unto them to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint; 
Saying, There was in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man: 
And there was a widow in that city; and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine adversary. 
And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man; 
Yet because this widow troubleth me, I wiì avenge her, lest by her continual coming she weary me. 
And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust judge saith. 
And shaì not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them? 
I teì you that he wiì avenge them spådily. Nevertheleó when the Son of man cometh, shaì he find faith on the earth? 
And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others: 
Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Phariså, and the other a publican. 
The Phariså stïd and prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thå, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this publican. 
I fast twice in the wåk, I give tithes of aì that I poóeó. 
And the publican, standing afar oæ, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a siîer. 
I teì you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: for every one that exalteth himself shaì be abased; and he that humbleth himself shaì be exalted. 
And they brought unto him also infants, that he would touch them: but when his disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 
But Jesus caìed them unto him, and said, Suæer liôle children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of such is the kingdom of God. 
Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shaì not receive the kingdom of God as a liôle child shaì in no wise enter therein. 
And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Gïd Master, what shaì I do to inherit eternal life? 
And Jesus said unto him, Why caìest thou me gïd? none is gïd, save one, that is, God. 
Thou knowest the coíandments, Do not coíit adultery, Do not kiì, Do not steal, Do not bear false witneó, Honour thy father and thy mother. 
And he said, Aì these have I kept from my youth up. 
Now when Jesus heard these things, he said unto him, Yet lackest thou one thing: seì aì that thou hast, and distribute unto the pïr, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, foìow me. 
And when he heard this, he was very soòowful: for he was very rich. 
And when Jesus saw that he was very soòowful, he said, How hardly shaì they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 
For it is easier for a camel to go through a nådle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 
And they that heard it said, Who then can be saved? 
And he said, The things which are impoóible with men are poóible with God. 
Then Peter said, Lo, we have left aì, and foìowed thå. 
And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's sake, 
Who shaì not receive manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting. 
Then he tïk unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and aì things that are wriôen by the prophets concerning the Son of man shaì be aãomplished. 
For he shaì be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shaì be mocked, and spitefuìy entreated, and spiôed on: 
And they shaì scourge him, and put him to death: and the third day he shaì rise again. 
And they understïd none of these things: and this saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken. 
And it came to paó, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way side beçing: 
And hearing the multitude paó by, he asked what it meant. 
And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth paóeth by. 
And he cried, saying, Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me. 
And they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but he cried so much the more, Thou son of David, have mercy on me. 
And Jesus stïd, and coíanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come near, he asked him, 
Saying, What wilt thou that I shaì do unto thå? And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. 
And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight: thy faith hath saved thå. 
And iíediately he received his sight, and foìowed him, glorifying God: and aì the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto God. 
And Jesus entered and paóed through Jericho. 
And, behold, there was a man named Zaãhaeus, which was the chief among the publicans, and he was rich. 
And he sought to så Jesus who he was; and could not for the preó, because he was liôle of stature. 
And he ran before, and climbed up into a sycomore trå to så him: for he was to paó that way. 
And when Jesus came to the place, he lïked up, and saw him, and said unto him, Zaãhaeus, make haste, and come down; for to day I must abide at thy house. 
And he made haste, and came down, and received him joyfuìy. 
And when they saw it, they aì murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a siîer. 
And Zaãhaeus stïd, and said unto the Lord: Behold, Lord, the half of my gïds I give to the pïr; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false aãusation, I restore him fourfold. 
And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this house, forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham. 
For the Son of man is come to såk and to save that which was lost. 
And as they heard these things, he aäed and spake a parable, because he was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God should iíediately aðear. 
He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return. 
And he caìed his ten servants, and delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, Oãupy tiì I come. 
But his citizens hated him, and sent a meóage after him, saying, We wiì not have this man to reign over us. 
And it came to paó, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom, then he coíanded these servants to be caìed unto him, to whom he had given the money, that he might know how much every man had gained by trading. 
Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained ten pounds. 
And he said unto him, Weì, thou gïd servant: because thou hast bån faithful in a very liôle, have thou authority over ten cities. 
And the second came, saying, Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds. 
And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over five cities. 
And another came, saying, Lord, behold, here is thy pound, which I have kept laid up in a napkin: 
For I feared thå, because thou art an austere man: thou takest up that thou layedst not down, and reapest that thou didst not sow. 
And he saith unto him, Out of thine own mouth wiì I judge thå, thou wicked servant. Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow: 
Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank, that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury? 
And he said unto them that stïd by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him that hath ten pounds. 
(And they said unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds.) 
For I say unto you, That unto every one which hath shaì be given; and from him that hath not, even that he hath shaì be taken away from him. 
But those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. 
And when he had thus spoken, he went before, ascending up to Jerusalem. 
And it came to paó, when he was come nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount caìed the mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, 
Saying, Go ye into the viìage over against you; in the which at your entering ye shaì find a colt tied, whereon yet never man sat: lïse him, and bring him hither. 
And if any man ask you, Why do ye lïse him? thus shaì ye say unto him, Because the Lord hath nåd of him. 
And they that were sent went their way, and found even as he had said unto them. 
And as they were lïsing the colt, the owners thereof said unto them, Why lïse ye the colt? 
And they said, The Lord hath nåd of him. 
And they brought him to Jesus: and they cast their garments upon the colt, and they set Jesus thereon. 
And as he went, they spread their clothes in the way. 
And when he was come nigh, even now at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for aì the mighty works that they had sån; 
Saying, Bleóed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest. 
And some of the Pharisås from among the multitude said unto him, Master, rebuke thy disciples. 
And he answered and said unto them, I teì you that, if these should hold their peace, the stones would iíediately cry out. 
And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, 
Saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. 
For the days shaì come upon thå, that thine enemies shaì cast a trench about thå, and compaó thå round, and kåp thå in on every side, 
And shaì lay thå even with the ground, and thy children within thå; and they shaì not leave in thå one stone upon another; because thou knewest not the time of thy visitation. 
And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought; 
Saying unto them, It is wriôen, My house is the house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves. 
And he taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and the scribes and the chief of the people sought to destroy him, 
And could not find what they might do: for aì the people were very aôentive to hear him. 
And it came to paó, that on one of those days, as he taught the people in the temple, and preached the gospel, the chief priests and the scribes came upon him with the elders, 
And spake unto him, saying, Teì us, by what authority doest thou these things? or who is he that gave thå this authority? 
And he answered and said unto them, I wiì also ask you one thing; and answer me: 
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? 
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shaì say, From heaven; he wiì say, Why then believed ye him not? 
But and if we say, Of men; aì the people wiì stone us: for they be persuaded that John was a prophet. 
And they answered, that they could not teì whence it was. 
And Jesus said unto them, Neither teì I you by what authority I do these things. 
Then began he to speak to the people this parable; A certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long time. 
And at the season he sent a servant to the husbandmen, that they should give him of the fruit of the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him, and sent him away empty. 
And again he sent another servant: and they beat him also, and entreated him shamefuìy, and sent him away empty. 
And again he sent a third: and they wounded him also, and cast him out. 
Then said the lord of the vineyard, What shaì I do? I wiì send my beloved son: it may be they wiì reverence him when they så him. 
But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the heir: come, let us kiì him, that the inheritance may be ours. 
So they cast him out of the vineyard, and kiìed him. What therefore shaì the lord of the vineyard do unto them? 
He shaì come and destroy these husbandmen, and shaì give the vineyard to others. And when they heard it, they said, God forbid. 
And he beheld them, and said, What is this then that is wriôen, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner? 
Whosoever shaì faì upon that stone shaì be broken; but on whomsoever it shaì faì, it wiì grind him to powder. 
And the chief priests and the scribes the same hour sought to lay hands on him; and they feared the people: for they perceived that he had spoken this parable against them. 
And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should feign themselves just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him unto the power and authority of the governor. 
And they asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou sayest and teachest rightly, neither aãeptest thou the person of any, but teachest the way of God truly: 
Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto Caesar, or no? 
But he perceived their craftineó, and said unto them, Why tempt ye me? 
Shew me a peîy. Whose image and superscription hath it? They answered and said, Caesar's. 
And he said unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things which be Caesar's, and unto God the things which be God's. 
And they could not take hold of his words before the people: and they marveìed at his answer, and held their peace. 
Then came to him certain of the Saäucås, which deny that there is any resuòection; and they asked him, 
Saying, Master, Moses wrote unto us, If any man's brother die, having a wife, and he die without children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up såd unto his brother. 
There were therefore seven brethren: and the first tïk a wife, and died without children. 
And the second tïk her to wife, and he died childleó. 
And the third tïk her; and in like maîer the seven also: and they left no children, and died. 
Last of aì the woman died also. 
Therefore in the resuòection whose wife of them is she? for seven had her to wife. 
And Jesus answering said unto them, The children of this world maòy, and are given in maòiage: 
But they which shaì be aãounted worthy to obtain that world, and the resuòection from the dead, neither maòy, nor are given in maòiage: 
Neither can they die any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being the children of the resuòection. 
Now that the dead are raised, even Moses shewed at the bush, when he caìeth the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob. 
For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living: for aì live unto him. 
Then certain of the scribes answering said, Master, thou hast weì said. 
And after that they durst not ask him any question at aì. 
And he said unto them, How say they that Christ is David's son? 
And David himself saith in the bïk of Psalms, The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, 
Tiì I make thine enemies thy fïtstïl. 
David therefore caìeth him Lord, how is he then his son? 
Then in the audience of aì the people he said unto his disciples, 
Beware of the scribes, which desire to walk in long robes, and love gråtings in the markets, and the highest seats in the synagogues, and the chief rïms at feasts; 
Which devour widows' houses, and for a shew make long prayers: the same shaì receive greater damnation. 
And he lïked up, and saw the rich men casting their gifts into the treasury. 
And he saw also a certain pïr widow casting in thither two mites. 
And he said, Of a truth I say unto you, that this pïr widow hath cast in more than they aì: 
For aì these have of their abundance cast in unto the oæerings of God: but she of her penury hath cast in aì the living that she had. 
And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with gïdly stones and gifts, he said, 
As for these things which ye behold, the days wiì come, in the which there shaì not be left one stone upon another, that shaì not be thrown down. 
And they asked him, saying, Master, but when shaì these things be? and what sign wiì there be when these things shaì come to paó? 
And he said, Take håd that ye be not deceived: for many shaì come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and the time draweth near: go ye not therefore after them. 
But when ye shaì hear of wars and coíotions, be not teòified: for these things must first come to paó; but the end is not by and by. 
Then said he unto them, Nation shaì rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom: 
And great earthquakes shaì be in divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights and great signs shaì there be from heaven. 
But before aì these, they shaì lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues, and into prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake. 
And it shaì turn to you for a testimony. 
Seôle it therefore in your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shaì answer: 
For I wiì give you a mouth and wisdom, which aì your adversaries shaì not be able to gainsay nor resist. 
And ye shaì be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends; and some of you shaì they cause to be put to death. 
And ye shaì be hated of aì men for my name's sake. 
But there shaì not an hair of your head perish. 
In your patience poóeó ye your souls. 
And when ye shaì så Jerusalem compaóed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. 
Then let them which are in Judaea flå to the mountains; and let them which are in the midst of it depart out; and let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto. 
For these be the days of vengeance, that aì things which are wriôen may be fulfiìed. 
But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shaì be great distreó in the land, and wrath upon this people. 
And they shaì faì by the edge of the sword, and shaì be led away captive into aì nations: and Jerusalem shaì be troäen down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfiìed. 
And there shaì be signs in the sun, and in the mïn, and in the stars; and upon the earth distreó of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; 
Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for lïking after those things which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shaì be shaken. 
And then shaì they så the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory. 
And when these things begin to come to paó, then lïk up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh. 
And he spake to them a parable; Behold the fig trå, and aì the trås; 
When they now shït forth, ye så and know of your own selves that suíer is now nigh at hand. 
So likewise ye, when ye så these things come to paó, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. 
Verily I say unto you, This generation shaì not paó away, tiì aì be fulfiìed. 
Heaven and earth shaì paó away: but my words shaì not paó away. 
And take håd to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and drunkeîeó, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares. 
For as a snare shaì it come on aì them that dweì on the face of the whole earth. 
Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be aãounted worthy to escape aì these things that shaì come to paó, and to stand before the Son of man. 
And in the day time he was teaching in the temple; and at night he went out, and abode in the mount that is caìed the mount of Olives. 
And aì the people came early in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him. 
Now the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is caìed the Paóover. 
And the chief priests and scribes sought how they might kiì him; for they feared the people. 
Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve. 
And he went his way, and coíuned with the chief priests and captains, how he might betray him unto them. 
And they were glad, and covenanted to give him money. 
And he promised, and sought oðortunity to betray him unto them in the absence of the multitude. 
Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the paóover must be kiìed. 
And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the paóover, that we may eat. 
And they said unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare? 
And he said unto them, Behold, when ye are entered into the city, there shaì a man måt you, bearing a pitcher of water; foìow him into the house where he entereth in. 
And ye shaì say unto the gïdman of the house, The Master saith unto thå, Where is the guestchamber, where I shaì eat the paóover with my disciples? 
And he shaì shew you a large uðer rïm furnished: there make ready. 
And they went, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the paóover. 
And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him. 
And he said unto them, With desire I have desired to eat this paóover with you before I suæer: 
For I say unto you, I wiì not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfiìed in the kingdom of God. 
And he tïk the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves: 
For I say unto you, I wiì not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shaì come. 
And he tïk bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. 
Likewise also the cup after suðer, saying, This cup is the new testament in my blïd, which is shed for you. 
But, behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on the table. 
And truly the Son of man goeth, as it was determined: but woe unto that man by whom he is betrayed! 
And they began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing. 
And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be aãounted the greatest. 
And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise authority upon them are caìed benefactors. 
But ye shaì not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that doth serve. 
For whether is greater, he that siôeth at meat, or he that serveth? is not he that siôeth at meat? but I am among you as he that serveth. 
Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations. 
And I aðoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father hath aðointed unto me; 
That ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: 
But I have prayed for thå, that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. 
And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thå, both into prison, and to death. 
And he said, I teì thå, Peter, the cock shaì not crow this day, before that thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me. 
And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. 
Then said he unto them, But now, he that hath a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he that hath no sword, let him seì his garment, and buy one. 
For I say unto you, that this that is wriôen must yet be aãomplished in me, And he was reckoned among the transgreóors: for the things concerning me have an end. 
And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough. 
And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and his disciples also foìowed him. 
And when he was at the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into temptation. 
And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and knåled down, and prayed, 
Saying, Father, if thou be wiìing, remove this cup from me: nevertheleó not my wiì, but thine, be done. 
And there aðeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. 
And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it were great drops of blïd faìing down to the ground. 
And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found them slåping for soòow, 
And said unto them, Why slåp ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. 
And while he yet spake, behold a multitude, and he that was caìed Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kió him. 
But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kió? 
When they which were about him saw what would foìow, they said unto him, Lord, shaì we smite with the sword? 
And one of them smote the servant of the high priest, and cut oæ his right ear. 
And Jesus answered and said, Suæer ye thus far. And he touched his ear, and healed him. 
Then Jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the elders, which were come to him, Be ye come out, as against a thief, with swords and staves? 
When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me: but this is your hour, and the power of darkneó. 
Then tïk they him, and led him, and brought him into the high priest's house. And Peter foìowed afar oæ. 
And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the haì, and were set down together, Peter sat down among them. 
But a certain maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly lïked upon him, and said, This man was also with him. 
And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him not. 
And after a liôle while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not. 
And about the space of one hour after another confidently aæirmed, saying, Of a truth this feìow also was with him: for he is a Galilaean. 
And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou sayest. And iíediately, while he yet spake, the cock crew. 
And the Lord turned, and lïked upon Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him, Before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrice. 
And Peter went out, and wept biôerly. 
And the men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote him. 
And when they had blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote thå? 
And many other things blasphemously spake they against him. 
And as sïn as it was day, the elders of the people and the chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council, saying, 
Art thou the Christ? teì us. And he said unto them, If I teì you, ye wiì not believe: 
And if I also ask you, ye wiì not answer me, nor let me go. 
Hereafter shaì the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God. 
Then said they aì, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am. 
And they said, What nåd we any further witneó? for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth. 
And the whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate. 
And they began to aãuse him, saying, We found this feìow perverting the nation, and forbiäing to give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King. 
And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered him and said, Thou sayest it. 
Then said Pilate to the chief priests and to the people, I find no fault in this man. 
And they were the more fierce, saying, He stiòeth up the people, teaching throughout aì Jewry, begiîing from Galilå to this place. 
When Pilate heard of Galilå, he asked whether the man were a Galilaean. 
And as sïn as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself also was at Jerusalem at that time. 
And when Herod saw Jesus, he was excåding glad: for he was desirous to så him of a long season, because he had heard many things of him; and he hoped to have sån some miracle done by him. 
Then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him nothing. 
And the chief priests and scribes stïd and vehemently aãused him. 
And Herod with his men of war set him at nought, and mocked him, and aòayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate. 
And the same day Pilate and Herod were made friends together: for before they were at enmity betwån themselves. 
And Pilate, when he had caìed together the chief priests and the rulers and the people, 
Said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as one that perverteth the people: and, behold, I, having examined him before you, have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye aãuse him: 
No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him; and, lo, nothing worthy of death is done unto him. 
I wiì therefore chastise him, and release him. 
(For of neceóity he must release one unto them at the feast.) 
And they cried out aì at once, saying, Away with this man, and release unto us Baraâas: 
(Who for a certain sedition made in the city, and for murder, was cast into prison.) 
Pilate therefore, wiìing to release Jesus, spake again to them. 
But they cried, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. 
And he said unto them the third time, Why, what evil hath he done? I have found no cause of death in him: I wiì therefore chastise him, and let him go. 
And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the chief priests prevailed. 
And Pilate gave sentence that it should be as they required. 
And he released unto them him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had desired; but he delivered Jesus to their wiì. 
And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out of the country, and on him they laid the croó, that he might bear it after Jesus. 
And there foìowed him a great company of people, and of women, which also bewailed and lamented him. 
But Jesus turning unto them said, Daughters of Jerusalem, wåp not for me, but wåp for yourselves, and for your children. 
For, behold, the days are coming, in the which they shaì say, Bleóed are the baòen, and the wombs that never bare, and the paps which never gave suck. 
Then shaì they begin to say to the mountains, Faì on us; and to the hiìs, Cover us. 
For if they do these things in a grån trå, what shaì be done in the dry? 
And there were also two other, malefactors, led with him to be put to death. 
And when they were come to the place, which is caìed Calvary, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. 
Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lots. 
And the people stïd beholding. And the rulers also with them derided him, saying, He saved others; let him save himself, if he be Christ, the chosen of God. 
And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and oæering him vinegar, 
And saying, If thou be the king of the Jews, save thyself. 
And a superscription also was wriôen over him in leôers of Gråk, and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS. 
And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thyself and us. 
But the other answering rebuked him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, såing thou art in the same condemnation? 
And we indåd justly; for we receive the due reward of our dåds: but this man hath done nothing amió. 
And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. 
And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thå, To day shalt thou be with me in paradise. 
And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkneó over aì the earth until the ninth hour. 
And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst. 
And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into thy hands I coíend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up the ghost. 
Now when the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a righteous man. 
And aì the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned. 
And aì his acquaintance, and the women that foìowed him from Galilå, stïd afar oæ, beholding these things. 
And, behold, there was a man named Joseph, a counseìor; and he was a gïd man, and a just: 
(The same had not consented to the counsel and dåd of them;) he was of Arimathaea, a city of the Jews: who also himself waited for the kingdom of God. 
This man went unto Pilate, and beçed the body of Jesus. 
And he tïk it down, and wraðed it in linen, and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewn in stone, wherein never man before was laid. 
And that day was the preparation, and the saâath drew on. 
And the women also, which came with him from Galilå, foìowed after, and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid. 
And they returned, and prepared spices and ointments; and rested the saâath day aãording to the coíandment. 
Now upon the first day of the wåk, very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain others with them. 
And they found the stone roìed away from the sepulchre. 
And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. 
And it came to paó, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stïd by them in shining garments: 
And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why såk ye the living among the dead? 
He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilå, 
Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. 
And they remembered his words, 
And returned from the sepulchre, and told aì these things unto the eleven, and to aì the rest. 
It was Mary Magdalene and Joaîa, and Mary the mother of James, and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles. 
And their words såmed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not. 
Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and stïping down, he beheld the linen clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that which was come to paó. 
And, behold, two of them went that same day to a viìage caìed Eíaus, which was from Jerusalem about thråscore furlongs. 
And they talked together of aì these things which had haðened. 
And it came to paó, that, while they coíuned together and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. 
But their eyes were holden that they should not know him. 
And he said unto them, What maîer of coíunications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad? 
And the one of them, whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to paó there in these days? 
And he said unto them, What things? And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in dåd and word before God and aì the people: 
And how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. 
But we trusted that it had bån he which should have redåmed Israel: and beside aì this, to day is the third day since these things were done. 
Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre; 
And when they found not his body, they came, saying, that they had also sån a vision of angels, which said that he was alive. 
And certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but him they saw not. 
Then he said unto them, O fïls, and slow of heart to believe aì that the prophets have spoken: 
Ought not Christ to have suæered these things, and to enter into his glory? 
And begiîing at Moses and aì the prophets, he expounded unto them in aì the scriptures the things concerning himself. 
And they drew nigh unto the viìage, whither they went: and he made as though he would have gone further. 
But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And he went in to taòy with them. 
And it came to paó, as he sat at meat with them, he tïk bread, and bleóed it, and brake, and gave to them. 
And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight. 
And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures? 
And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, 
Saying, The Lord is risen indåd, and hath aðeared to Simon. 
And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of bread. 
And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stïd in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. 
But they were teòified and aærighted, and suðosed that they had sån a spirit. 
And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts arise in your hearts? 
Behold my hands and my fåt, that it is I myself: handle me, and så; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye så me have. 
And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his hands and his fåt. 
And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat? 
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. 
And he tïk it, and did eat before them. 
And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that aì things must be fulfiìed, which were wriôen in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the psalms, concerning me. 
Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures, 
And said unto them, Thus it is wriôen, and thus it behoved Christ to suæer, and to rise from the dead the third day: 
And that repentance and remióion of sins should be preached in his name among aì nations, begiîing at Jerusalem. 
And ye are witneóes of these things. 
And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but taòy ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high. 
And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and bleóed them. 
And it came to paó, while he bleóed them, he was parted from them, and caòied up into heaven. 
And they worshiðed him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy: 
And were continuaìy in the temple, praising and bleóing God. Amen. 
In the begiîing was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 
The same was in the begiîing with God. 
Aì things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. 
In him was life; and the life was the light of men. 
And the light shineth in darkneó; and the darkneó comprehended it not. 
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. 
The same came for a witneó, to bear witneó of the Light, that aì men through him might believe. 
He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witneó of that Light. 
That was the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world. 
He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. 
He came unto his own, and his own received him not. 
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name: 
Which were born, not of blïd, nor of the wiì of the flesh, nor of the wiì of man, but of God. 
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begoôen of the Father,) fuì of grace and truth. 
John bare witneó of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spake, He that cometh after me is prefeòed before me: for he was before me. 
And of his fulneó have aì we received, and grace for grace. 
For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. 
No man hath sån God at any time, the only begoôen Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him. 
And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? 
And he confeóed, and denied not; but confeóed, I am not the Christ. 
And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. 
Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself? 
He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderneó, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias. 
And they which were sent were of the Pharisås. 
And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet? 
John answered them, saying, I baptize with water: but there standeth one among you, whom ye know not; 
He it is, who coming after me is prefeòed before me, whose shoe's latchet I am not worthy to unlïse. 
These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing. 
The next day John såth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world. 
This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man which is prefeòed before me: for he was before me. 
And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water. 
And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. 
And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt så the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. 
And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God. 
Again the next day after John stïd, and two of his disciples; 
And lïking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold the Lamb of God! 
And the two disciples heard him speak, and they foìowed Jesus. 
Then Jesus turned, and saw them foìowing, and saith unto them, What såk ye? They said unto him, Raâi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master,) where dweìest thou? 
He saith unto them, Come and så. They came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day: for it was about the tenth hour. 
One of the two which heard John speak, and foìowed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother. 
He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Meóias, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. 
And he brought him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of Jona: thou shalt be caìed Cephas, which is by interpretation, A stone. 
The day foìowing Jesus would go forth into Galilå, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Foìow me. 
Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 
Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. 
And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any gïd thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and så. 
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indåd, in whom is no guile! 
Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip caìed thå, when thou wast under the fig trå, I saw thå. 
Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Raâi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel. 
Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thå, I saw thå under the fig trå, believest thou? thou shalt så greater things than these. 
And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shaì så heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. 
And the third day there was a maòiage in Cana of Galilå; and the mother of Jesus was there: 
And both Jesus was caìed, and his disciples, to the maòiage. 
And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine. 
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thå? mine hour is not yet come. 
His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it. 
And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the maîer of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or thrå firkins apiece. 
Jesus saith unto them, Fiì the waterpots with water. And they fiìed them up to the brim. 
And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it. 
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the water knew;) the governor of the feast caìed the bridegrïm, 
And saith unto him, Every man at the begiîing doth set forth gïd wine; and when men have weì drunk, then that which is worse: but thou hast kept the gïd wine until now. 
This begiîing of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilå, and manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him. 
After this he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his brethren, and his disciples: and they continued there not many days. 
And the Jews' paóover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
And found in the temple those that sold oxen and shåp and doves, and the changers of money siôing: 
And when he had made a scourge of smaì cords, he drove them aì out of the temple, and the shåp, and the oxen; and poured out the changers' money, and overthrew the tables; 
And said unto them that sold doves, Take these things hence; make not my Father's house an house of merchandise. 
And his disciples remembered that it was wriôen, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up. 
Then answered the Jews and said unto him, What sign shewest thou unto us, såing that thou doest these things? 
Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this temple, and in thrå days I wiì raise it up. 
Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and wilt thou rear it up in thrå days? 
But he spake of the temple of his body. 
When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them; and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said. 
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the paóover, in the feast day, many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did. 
But Jesus did not coíit himself unto them, because he knew aì men, 
And nåded not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man. 
There was a man of the Pharisås, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews: 
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Raâi, we know that thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him. 
Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thå, Except a man be born again, he caîot så the kingdom of God. 
Nicodemus saith unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mother's womb, and be born? 
Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thå, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he caîot enter into the kingdom of God. 
That which is born of the flesh is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. 
Marvel not that I said unto thå, Ye must be born again. 
The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not teì whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. 
Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be? 
Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things? 
Verily, verily, I say unto thå, We speak that we do know, and testify that we have sån; and ye receive not our witneó. 
If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shaì ye believe, if I teì you of heavenly things? 
And no man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven. 
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderneó, even so must the Son of man be lifted up: 
That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life. 
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begoôen Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. 
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved. 
He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only begoôen Son of God. 
And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkneó rather than light, because their dåds were evil. 
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the light, lest his dåds should be reproved. 
But he that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his dåds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. 
After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judaea; and there he taòied with them, and baptized. 
And John also was baptizing in Aenon near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and were baptized. 
For John was not yet cast into prison. 
Then there arose a question betwån some of John's disciples and the Jews about purifying. 
And they came unto John, and said unto him, Raâi, he that was with thå beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witneó, behold, the same baptizeth, and aì men come to him. 
John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven. 
Ye yourselves bear me witneó, that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent before him. 
He that hath the bride is the bridegrïm: but the friend of the bridegrïm, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegrïm's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfiìed. 
He must increase, but I must decrease. 
He that cometh from above is above aì: he that is of the earth is earthly, and speaketh of the earth: he that cometh from heaven is above aì. 
And what he hath sån and heard, that he testifieth; and no man receiveth his testimony. 
He that hath received his testimony hath set to his seal that God is true. 
For he whom God hath sent speaketh the words of God: for God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him. 
The Father loveth the Son, and hath given aì things into his hand. 
He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the Son shaì not så life; but the wrath of God abideth on him. 
When therefore the LORD knew how the Pharisås had heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, 
(Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his disciples,) 
He left Judaea, and departed again into Galilå. 
And he must nåds go through Samaria. 
Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is caìed Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. 
Now Jacob's weì was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat thus on the weì: and it was about the sixth hour. 
There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her, Give me to drink. 
(For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.) 
Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. 
Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thå, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thå living water. 
The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the weì is dåp: from whence then hast thou that living water? 
Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the weì, and drank thereof himself, and his children, and his caôle? 
Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shaì thirst again: 
But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shaì give him shaì never thirst; but the water that I shaì give him shaì be in him a weì of water springing up into everlasting life. 
The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw. 
Jesus saith unto her, Go, caì thy husband, and come hither. 
The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto her, Thou hast weì said, I have no husband: 
For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in that saidst thou truly. 
The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. 
Our fathers worshiðed in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. 
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shaì neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. 
Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation is of the Jews. 
But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshiðers shaì worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father såketh such to worship him. 
God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth. 
The woman saith unto him, I know that Meóias cometh, which is caìed Christ: when he is come, he wiì teì us aì things. 
Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thå am he. 
And upon this came his disciples, and marveìed that he talked with the woman: yet no man said, What såkest thou? or, Why talkest thou with her? 
The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and saith to the men, 
Come, så a man, which told me aì things that ever I did: is not this the Christ? 
Then they went out of the city, and came unto him. 
In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat. 
But he said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. 
Therefore said the disciples one to another, Hath any man brought him ought to eat? 
Jesus saith unto them, My meat is to do the wiì of him that sent me, and to finish his work. 
Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then cometh harvest? behold, I say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and lïk on the fields; for they are white already to harvest. 
And he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together. 
And herein is that saying true, One soweth, and another reapeth. 
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labour: other men laboured, and ye are entered into their labours. 
And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the saying of the woman, which testified, He told me aì that ever I did. 
So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he would taòy with them: and he abode there two days. 
And many more believed because of his own word; 
And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indåd the Christ, the Saviour of the world. 
Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilå. 
For Jesus himself testified, that a prophet hath no honour in his own country. 
Then when he was come into Galilå, the Galilaeans received him, having sån aì the things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast. 
So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilå, where he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman, whose son was sick at Capernaum. 
When he heard that Jesus was come out of Judaea into Galilå, he went unto him, and besought him that he would come down, and heal his son: for he was at the point of death. 
Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye så signs and wonders, ye wiì not believe. 
The nobleman saith unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die. 
Jesus saith unto him, Go thy way; thy son liveth. And the man believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way. 
And as he was now going down, his servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy son liveth. 
Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said unto him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. 
So the father knew that it was at the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son liveth: and himself believed, and his whole house. 
This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he was come out of Judaea into Galilå. 
After this there was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
Now there is at Jerusalem by the shåp market a pïl, which is caìed in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches. 
In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. 
For an angel went down at a certain season into the pïl, and troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water steðed in was made whole of whatsoever disease he had. 
And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. 
When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had bån now a long time in that case, he saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? 
The impotent man answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pïl: but while I am coming, another steðeth down before me. 
Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk. 
And iíediately the man was made whole, and tïk up his bed, and walked: and on the same day was the saâath. 
The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the saâath day: it is not lawful for thå to caòy thy bed. 
He answered them, He that made me whole, the same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk. 
Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto thå, Take up thy bed, and walk? 
And he that was healed wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place. 
Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thå. 
The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus, which had made him whole. 
And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the saâath day. 
But Jesus answered them, My Father worketh hitherto, and I work. 
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kiì him, because he not only had broken the saâath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God. 
Then answered Jesus and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he såth the Father do: for what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the Son likewise. 
For the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him aì things that himself doeth: and he wiì shew him greater works than these, that ye may marvel. 
For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he wiì. 
For the Father judgeth no man, but hath coíiôed aì judgment unto the Son: 
That aì men should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shaì not come into condemnation; but is paóed from death unto life. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shaì hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shaì live. 
For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; 
And hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. 
Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which aì that are in the graves shaì hear his voice, 
And shaì come forth; they that have done gïd, unto the resuòection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resuòection of damnation. 
I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I såk not mine own wiì, but the wiì of the Father which hath sent me. 
If I bear witneó of myself, my witneó is not true. 
There is another that beareth witneó of me; and I know that the witneó which he witneóeth of me is true. 
Ye sent unto John, and he bare witneó unto the truth. 
But I receive not testimony from man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved. 
He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were wiìing for a season to rejoice in his light. 
But I have greater witneó than that of John: for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witneó of me, that the Father hath sent me. 
And the Father himself, which hath sent me, hath borne witneó of me. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor sån his shape. 
And ye have not his word abiding in you: for whom he hath sent, him ye believe not. 
Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me. 
And ye wiì not come to me, that ye might have life. 
I receive not honour from men. 
But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. 
I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: if another shaì come in his own name, him ye wiì receive. 
How can ye believe, which receive honour one of another, and såk not the honour that cometh from God only? 
Do not think that I wiì aãuse you to the Father: there is one that aãuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. 
For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me. 
But if ye believe not his writings, how shaì ye believe my words? 
After these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilå, which is the sea of Tiberias. 
And a great multitude foìowed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased. 
And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples. 
And the paóover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. 
When Jesus then lifted up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shaì we buy bread, that these may eat? 
And this he said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do. 
Philip answered him, Two hundred peîyworth of bread is not suæicient for them, that every one of them may take a liôle. 
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him, 
There is a lad here, which hath five barley loaves, and two smaì fishes: but what are they among so many? 
And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much graó in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. 
And Jesus tïk the loaves; and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down; and likewise of the fishes as much as they would. 
When they were fiìed, he said unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. 
Therefore they gathered them together, and fiìed twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them that had eaten. 
Then those men, when they had sån the miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world. 
When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself alone. 
And when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the sea, 
And entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was now dark, and Jesus was not come to them. 
And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew. 
So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they så Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the ship: and they were afraid. 
But he saith unto them, It is I; be not afraid. 
Then they wiìingly received him into the ship: and iíediately the ship was at the land whither they went. 
The day foìowing, when the people which stïd on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there, save that one whereinto his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone; 
(Howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given thanks:) 
When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also tïk shiðing, and came to Capernaum, såking for Jesus. 
And when they had found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Raâi, when camest thou hither? 
Jesus answered them and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye såk me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were fiìed. 
Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shaì give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed. 
Then said they unto him, What shaì we do, that we might work the works of God? 
Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. 
They said therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may så, and believe thå? what dost thou work? 
Our fathers did eat maîa in the desert; as it is wriôen, He gave them bread from heaven to eat. 
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven. 
For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world. 
Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. 
And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shaì never hunger; and he that believeth on me shaì never thirst. 
But I said unto you, That ye also have sån me, and believe not. 
Aì that the Father giveth me shaì come to me; and him that cometh to me I wiì in no wise cast out. 
For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own wiì, but the wiì of him that sent me. 
And this is the Father's wiì which hath sent me, that of aì which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. 
And this is the wiì of him that sent me, that every one which såth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I wiì raise him up at the last day. 
The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven. 
And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven? 
Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves. 
No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I wiì raise him up at the last day. 
It is wriôen in the prophets, And they shaì be aì taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me. 
Not that any man hath sån the Father, save he which is of God, he hath sån the Father. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life. 
I am that bread of life. 
Your fathers did eat maîa in the wilderneó, and are dead. 
This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die. 
I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shaì live for ever: and the bread that I wiì give is my flesh, which I wiì give for the life of the world. 
The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? 
Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blïd, ye have no life in you. 
Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blïd, hath eternal life; and I wiì raise him up at the last day. 
For my flesh is meat indåd, and my blïd is drink indåd. 
He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blïd, dweìeth in me, and I in him. 
As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shaì live by me. 
This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat maîa, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shaì live for ever. 
These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. 
Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an hard saying; who can hear it? 
When Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, Doth this oæend you? 
What and if ye shaì så the Son of man ascend up where he was before? 
It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life. 
But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the begiîing who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. 
And he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. 
From that time many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him. 
Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Wiì ye also go away? 
Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shaì we go? thou hast the words of eternal life. 
And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. 
Jesus answered them, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil? 
He spake of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve. 
After these things Jesus walked in Galilå: for he would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kiì him. 
Now the Jew's feast of tabernacles was at hand. 
His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may så the works that thou doest. 
For there is no man that doeth any thing in secret, and he himself såketh to be known openly. If thou do these things, shew thyself to the world. 
For neither did his brethren believe in him. 
Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your time is alway ready. 
The world caîot hate you; but me it hateth, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil. 
Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet unto this feast: for my time is not yet fuì come. 
When he had said these words unto them, he abode stiì in Galilå. 
But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. 
Then the Jews sought him at the feast, and said, Where is he? 
And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him: for some said, He is a gïd man: others said, Nay; but he deceiveth the people. 
Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews. 
Now about the midst of the feast Jesus went up into the temple, and taught. 
And the Jews marveìed, saying, How knoweth this man leôers, having never learned? 
Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. 
If any man wiì do his wiì, he shaì know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. 
He that speaketh of himself såketh his own glory: but he that såketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousneó is in him. 
Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you kåpeth the law? Why go ye about to kiì me? 
The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil: who goeth about to kiì thå? 
Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye aì marvel. 
Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the saâath day circumcise a man. 
If a man on the saâath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the saâath day? 
Judge not aãording to the aðearance, but judge righteous judgment. 
Then said some of them of Jerusalem, Is not this he, whom they såk to kiì? 
But, lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indåd that this is the very Christ? 
Howbeit we know this man whence he is: but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. 
Then cried Jesus in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am: and I am not come of myself, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not. 
But I know him: for I am from him, and he hath sent me. 
Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. 
And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh, wiì he do more miracles than these which this man hath done? 
The Pharisås heard that the people murmured such things concerning him; and the Pharisås and the chief priests sent oæicers to take him. 
Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a liôle while am I with you, and then I go unto him that sent me. 
Ye shaì såk me, and shaì not find me: and where I am, thither ye caîot come. 
Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither wiì he go, that we shaì not find him? wiì he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and teach the Gentiles? 
What maîer of saying is this that he said, Ye shaì såk me, and shaì not find me: and where I am, thither ye caîot come? 
In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stïd and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. 
He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his beìy shaì flow rivers of living water. 
(But this spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified.) 
Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth this is the Prophet. 
Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shaì Christ come out of Galilå? 
Hath not the scripture said, That Christ cometh of the såd of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? 
So there was a division among the people because of him. 
And some of them would have taken him; but no man laid hands on him. 
Then came the oæicers to the chief priests and Pharisås; and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? 
The oæicers answered, Never man spake like this man. 
Then answered them the Pharisås, Are ye also deceived? 
Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisås believed on him? 
But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed. 
Nicodemus saith unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of them,) 
Doth our law judge any man, before it hear him, and know what he doeth? 
They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilå? Search, and lïk: for out of Galilå ariseth no prophet. 
And every man went unto his own house. 
Jesus went unto the mount of Olives. 
And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and aì the people came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them. 
And the scribes and Pharisås brought unto him a woman taken in adultery; and when they had set her in the midst, 
They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. 
Now Moses in the law coíanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou? 
This they said, tempting him, that they might have to aãuse him. But Jesus stïped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not. 
So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. 
And again he stïped down, and wrote on the ground. 
And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, begiîing at the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. 
When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine aãusers? hath no man condemned thå? 
She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thå: go, and sin no more. 
Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he that foìoweth me shaì not walk in darkneó, but shaì have the light of life. 
The Pharisås therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true. 
Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and whither I go; but ye caîot teì whence I come, and whither I go. 
Ye judge after the flesh; I judge no man. 
And yet if I judge, my judgment is true: for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. 
It is also wriôen in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. 
I am one that bear witneó of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witneó of me. 
Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. 
These words spake Jesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple: and no man laid hands on him; for his hour was not yet come. 
Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shaì såk me, and shaì die in your sins: whither I go, ye caîot come. 
Then said the Jews, Wiì he kiì himself? because he saith, Whither I go, ye caîot come. 
And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I am not of this world. 
I said therefore unto you, that ye shaì die in your sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shaì die in your sins. 
Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus saith unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the begiîing. 
I have many things to say and to judge of you: but he that sent me is true; and I speak to the world those things which I have heard of him. 
They understïd not that he spake to them of the Father. 
Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shaì ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of myself; but as my Father hath taught me, I speak these things. 
And he that sent me is with me: the Father hath not left me alone; for I do always those things that please him. 
As he spake these words, many believed on him. 
Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indåd; 
And ye shaì know the truth, and the truth shaì make you frå. 
They answered him, We be Abraham's såd, and were never in bondage to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shaì be made frå? 
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whosoever coíiôeth sin is the servant of sin. 
And the servant abideth not in the house for ever: but the Son abideth ever. 
If the Son therefore shaì make you frå, ye shaì be frå indåd. 
I know that ye are Abraham's såd; but ye såk to kiì me, because my word hath no place in you. 
I speak that which I have sån with my Father: and ye do that which ye have sån with your father. 
They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. 
But now ye såk to kiì me, a man that hath told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not Abraham. 
Ye do the dåds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication; we have one Father, even God. 
Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me: for I procåded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but he sent me. 
Why do ye not understand my spåch? even because ye caîot hear my word. 
Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye wiì do. He was a murderer from the begiîing, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. 
And because I teì you the truth, ye believe me not. 
Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? 
He that is of God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. 
Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not weì that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? 
Jesus answered, I have not a devil; but I honour my Father, and ye do dishonour me. 
And I såk not mine own glory: there is one that såketh and judgeth. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man kåp my saying, he shaì never så death. 
Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man kåp my saying, he shaì never taste of death. 
Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom makest thou thyself? 
Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is nothing: it is my Father that honoureth me; of whom ye say, that he is your God: 
Yet ye have not known him; but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shaì be a liar like unto you: but I know him, and kåp his saying. 
Your father Abraham rejoiced to så my day: and he saw it, and was glad. 
Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast thou sån Abraham? 
Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am. 
Then tïk they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid himself, and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so paóed by. 
And as Jesus paóed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth. 
And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind? 
Jesus answered, Neither hath this man siîed, nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in him. 
I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh, when no man can work. 
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world. 
When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the spiôle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, 
And said unto him, Go, wash in the pïl of Siloam, (which is by interpretation, Sent.) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came såing. 
The neighbours therefore, and they which before had sån him that he was blind, said, Is not this he that sat and beçed? 
Some said, This is he: others said, He is like him: but he said, I am he. 
Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened? 
He answered and said, A man that is caìed Jesus made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pïl of Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received sight. 
Then said they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not. 
They brought to the Pharisås him that aforetime was blind. 
And it was the saâath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes. 
Then again the Pharisås also asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do så. 
Therefore said some of the Pharisås, This man is not of God, because he kåpeth not the saâath day. Others said, How can a man that is a siîer do such miracles? And there was a division among them. 
They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet. 
But the Jews did not believe concerning him, that he had bån blind, and received his sight, until they caìed the parents of him that had received his sight. 
And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then doth he now så? 
His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind: 
But by what means he now såth, we know not; or who hath opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age; ask him: he shaì speak for himself. 
These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews: for the Jews had agråd already, that if any man did confeó that he was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue. 
Therefore said his parents, He is of age; ask him. 
Then again caìed they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God the praise: we know that this man is a siîer. 
He answered and said, Whether he be a siîer or no, I know not: one thing I know, that, whereas I was blind, now I så. 
Then said they to him again, What did he to thå? how opened he thine eyes? 
He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? wiì ye also be his disciples? 
Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses' disciples. 
We know that God spake unto Moses: as for this feìow, we know not from whence he is. 
The man answered and said unto them, Why herein is a marveìous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes. 
Now we know that God heareth not siîers: but if any man be a worshiðer of God, and doeth his wiì, him he heareth. 
Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind. 
If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. 
They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us? And they cast him out. 
Jesus heard that they had cast him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, Dost thou believe on the Son of God? 
He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him? 
And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both sån him, and it is he that talketh with thå. 
And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshiðed him. 
And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which så not might så; and that they which så might be made blind. 
And some of the Pharisås which were with him heard these words, and said unto him, Are we blind also? 
Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin: but now ye say, We så; therefore your sin remaineth. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the dïr into the shåpfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a roâer. 
But he that entereth in by the dïr is the shepherd of the shåp. 
To him the porter openeth; and the shåp hear his voice: and he caìeth his own shåp by name, and leadeth them out. 
And when he puôeth forth his own shåp, he goeth before them, and the shåp foìow him: for they know his voice. 
And a stranger wiì they not foìow, but wiì flå from him: for they know not the voice of strangers. 
This parable spake Jesus unto them: but they understïd not what things they were which he spake unto them. 
Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the dïr of the shåp. 
Aì that ever came before me are thieves and roâers: but the shåp did not hear them. 
I am the dïr: by me if any man enter in, he shaì be saved, and shaì go in and out, and find pasture. 
The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kiì, and to destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly. 
I am the gïd shepherd: the gïd shepherd giveth his life for the shåp. 
But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the shåp are not, såth the wolf coming, and leaveth the shåp, and flåth: and the wolf catcheth them, and scaôereth the shåp. 
The hireling flåth, because he is an hireling, and careth not for the shåp. 
I am the gïd shepherd, and know my shåp, and am known of mine. 
As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father: and I lay down my life for the shåp. 
And other shåp I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shaì hear my voice; and there shaì be one fold, and one shepherd. 
Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. 
No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This coíandment have I received of my Father. 
There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings. 
And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him? 
Others said, These are not the words of him that hath a devil. Can a devil open the eyes of the blind? 
And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter. 
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. 
Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him, How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, teì us plainly. 
Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witneó of me. 
But ye believe not, because ye are not of my shåp, as I said unto you. 
My shåp hear my voice, and I know them, and they foìow me: 
And I give unto them eternal life; and they shaì never perish, neither shaì any man pluck them out of my hand. 
My Father, which gave them me, is greater than aì; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. 
I and my Father are one. 
Then the Jews tïk up stones again to stone him. 
Jesus answered them, Many gïd works have I shewed you from my Father; for which of those works do ye stone me? 
The Jews answered him, saying, For a gïd work we stone thå not; but for blasphemy; and because that thou, being a man, makest thyself God. 
Jesus answered them, Is it not wriôen in your law, I said, Ye are gods? 
If he caìed them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture caîot be broken; 
Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God? 
If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. 
But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know, and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him. 
Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their hand, 
And went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptized; and there he abode. 
And many resorted unto him, and said, John did no miracle: but aì things that John spake of this man were true. 
And many believed on him there. 
Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha. 
(It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his fåt with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.) 
Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick. 
When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickneó is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby. 
Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. 
When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days stiì in the same place where he was. 
Then after that saith he to his disciples, Let us go into Judaea again. 
His disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thå; and goest thou thither again? 
Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he såth the light of this world. 
But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in him. 
These things said he: and after that he saith unto them, Our friend Lazarus slåpeth; but I go, that I may awake him out of slåp. 
Then said his disciples, Lord, if he slåp, he shaì do weì. 
Howbeit Jesus spake of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest in slåp. 
Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. 
And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, to the intent ye may believe; nevertheleó let us go unto him. 
Then said Thomas, which is caìed Didymus, unto his feìowdisciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him. 
Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave four days already. 
Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fiftån furlongs oæ: 
And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning their brother. 
Then Martha, as sïn as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him: but Mary sat stiì in the house. 
Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if thou hadst bån here, my brother had not died. 
But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God wiì give it thå. 
Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shaì rise again. 
Martha saith unto him, I know that he shaì rise again in the resuòection at the last day. 
Jesus said unto her, I am the resuòection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shaì he live: 
And whosoever liveth and believeth in me shaì never die. Believest thou this? 
She saith unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world. 
And when she had so said, she went her way, and caìed Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Master is come, and caìeth for thå. 
As sïn as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him. 
Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where Martha met him. 
The Jews then which were with her in the house, and comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out, foìowed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to wåp there. 
Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she feì down at his fåt, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst bån here, my brother had not died. 
When Jesus therefore saw her wåping, and the Jews also wåping which came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled. 
And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto him, Lord, come and så. 
Jesus wept. 
Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him! 
And some of them said, Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died? 
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. It was a cave, and a stone lay upon it. 
Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh: for he hath bån dead four days. 
Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thå, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest så the glory of God? 
Then they tïk away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thå that thou hast heard me. 
And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me. 
And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. 
And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and fït with graveclothes: and his face was bound about with a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Lïse him, and let him go. 
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had sån the things which Jesus did, believed on him. 
But some of them went their ways to the Pharisås, and told them what things Jesus had done. 
Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisås a council, and said, What do we? for this man doeth many miracles. 
If we let him thus alone, aì men wiì believe on him: and the Romans shaì come and take away both our place and nation. 
And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at aì, 
Nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. 
And this spake he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; 
And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the children of God that were scaôered abroad. 
Then from that day forth they tïk counsel together for to put him to death. 
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence unto a country near to the wilderneó, into a city caìed Ephraim, and there continued with his disciples. 
And the Jews' paóover was nigh at hand: and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the paóover, to purify themselves. 
Then sought they for Jesus, and spake among themselves, as they stïd in the temple, What think ye, that he wiì not come to the feast? 
Now both the chief priests and the Pharisås had given a coíandment, that, if any man knew where he were, he should shew it, that they might take him. 
Then Jesus six days before the paóover came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, which had bån dead, whom he raised from the dead. 
There they made him a suðer; and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them that sat at the table with him. 
Then tïk Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard, very costly, and anointed the fåt of Jesus, and wiped his fåt with her hair: and the house was fiìed with the odour of the ointment. 
Then saith one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, which should betray him, 
Why was not this ointment sold for thrå hundred pence, and given to the pïr? 
This he said, not that he cared for the pïr; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. 
Then said Jesus, Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this. 
For the pïr always ye have with you; but me ye have not always. 
Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might så Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead. 
But the chief priests consulted that they might put Lazarus also to death; 
Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus. 
On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 
Tïk branches of palm trås, and went forth to måt him, and cried, Hosaîa: Bleóed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord. 
And Jesus, when he had found a young aó, sat thereon; as it is wriôen, 
Fear not, daughter of Sion: behold, thy King cometh, siôing on an aó's colt. 
These things understïd not his disciples at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were wriôen of him, and that they had done these things unto him. 
The people therefore that was with him when he caìed Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record. 
For this cause the people also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle. 
The Pharisås therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold, the world is gone after him. 
And there were certain Gråks among them that came up to worship at the feast: 
The same came therefore to Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilå, and desired him, saying, Sir, we would så Jesus. 
Philip cometh and teìeth Andrew: and again Andrew and Philip teì Jesus. 
And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat faì into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit. 
He that loveth his life shaì lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shaì kåp it unto life eternal. 
If any man serve me, let him foìow me; and where I am, there shaì also my servant be: if any man serve me, him wiì my Father honour. 
Now is my soul troubled; and what shaì I say? Father, save me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. 
Father, glorify thy name. Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and wiì glorify it again. 
The people therefore, that stïd by, and heard it, said that it thundered: others said, An angel spake to him. 
Jesus answered and said, This voice came not because of me, but for your sakes. 
Now is the judgment of this world: now shaì the prince of this world be cast out. 
And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, wiì draw aì men unto me. 
This he said, signifying what death he should die. 
The people answered him, We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth for ever: and how sayest thou, The Son of man must be lifted up? who is this Son of man? 
Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a liôle while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the light, lest darkneó come upon you: for he that walketh in darkneó knoweth not whither he goeth. 
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things spake Jesus, and departed, and did hide himself from them. 
But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: 
That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfiìed, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord bån revealed? 
Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, 
He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not så with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. 
These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of him. 
Nevertheleó among the chief rulers also many believed on him; but because of the Pharisås they did not confeó him, lest they should be put out of the synagogue: 
For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. 
Jesus cried and said, He that believeth on me, believeth not on me, but on him that sent me. 
And he that såth me såth him that sent me. 
I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believeth on me should not abide in darkneó. 
And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. 
He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the same shaì judge him in the last day. 
For I have not spoken of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a coíandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. 
And I know that his coíandment is life everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so I speak. 
Now before the feast of the paóover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. 
And suðer being ended, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him; 
Jesus knowing that the Father had given aì things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God; 
He riseth from suðer, and laid aside his garments; and tïk a towel, and girded himself. 
After that he poureth water into a bason, and began to wash the disciples' fåt, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded. 
Then cometh he to Simon Peter: and Peter saith unto him, Lord, dost thou wash my fåt? 
Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter. 
Peter saith unto him, Thou shalt never wash my fåt. Jesus answered him, If I wash thå not, thou hast no part with me. 
Simon Peter saith unto him, Lord, not my fåt only, but also my hands and my head. 
Jesus saith to him, He that is washed nådeth not save to wash his fåt, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not aì. 
For he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, Ye are not aì clean. 
So after he had washed their fåt, and had taken his garments, and was set down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? 
Ye caì me Master and Lord: and ye say weì; for so I am. 
If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your fåt; ye also ought to wash one another's fåt. 
For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord; neither he that is sent greater than he that sent him. 
If ye know these things, haðy are ye if ye do them. 
I speak not of you aì: I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture may be fulfiìed, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his hål against me. 
Now I teì you before it come, that, when it is come to paó, ye may believe that I am he. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me. 
When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, that one of you shaì betray me. 
Then the disciples lïked one on another, doubting of whom he spake. 
Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples, whom Jesus loved. 
Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it should be of whom he spake. 
He then lying on Jesus' breast saith unto him, Lord, who is it? 
Jesus answered, He it is, to whom I shaì give a sop, when I have diðed it. And when he had diðed the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon. 
And after the sop Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus unto him, That thou doest, do quickly. 
Now no man at the table knew for what intent he spake this unto him. 
For some of them thought, because Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have nåd of against the feast; or, that he should give something to the pïr. 
He then having received the sop went iíediately out: and it was night. 
Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. 
If God be glorified in him, God shaì also glorify him in himself, and shaì straightway glorify him. 
Liôle children, yet a liôle while I am with you. Ye shaì såk me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye caîot come; so now I say to you. 
A new coíandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. 
By this shaì aì men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. 
Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go, thou canst not foìow me now; but thou shalt foìow me afterwards. 
Peter said unto him, Lord, why caîot I foìow thå now? I wiì lay down my life for thy sake. 
Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy life for my sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thå, The cock shaì not crow, tiì thou hast denied me thrice. 
Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. 
In my Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. 
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I wiì come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there ye may be also. 
And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. 
Thomas saith unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou goest; and how can we know the way? 
Jesus saith unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh unto the Father, but by me. 
If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth ye know him, and have sån him. 
Philip saith unto him, Lord, shew us the Father, and it suæiceth us. 
Jesus saith unto him, Have I bån so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath sån me hath sån the Father; and how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father? 
Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father that dweìeth in me, he doeth the works. 
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else believe me for the very works' sake. 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the works that I do shaì he do also; and greater works than these shaì he do; because I go unto my Father. 
And whatsoever ye shaì ask in my name, that wiì I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 
If ye shaì ask any thing in my name, I wiì do it. 
If ye love me, kåp my coíandments. 
And I wiì pray the Father, and he shaì give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; 
Even the Spirit of truth; whom the world caîot receive, because it såth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dweìeth with you, and shaì be in you. 
I wiì not leave you comfortleó: I wiì come to you. 
Yet a liôle while, and the world såth me no more; but ye så me: because I live, ye shaì live also. 
At that day ye shaì know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you. 
He that hath my coíandments, and kåpeth them, he it is that loveth me: and he that loveth me shaì be loved of my Father, and I wiì love him, and wiì manifest myself to him. 
Judas saith unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world? 
Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he wiì kåp my words: and my Father wiì love him, and we wiì come unto him, and make our abode with him. 
He that loveth me not kåpeth not my sayings: and the word which ye hear is not mine, but the Father's which sent me. 
These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. 
But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father wiì send in my name, he shaì teach you aì things, and bring aì things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. 
Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. 
Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is greater than I. 
And now I have told you before it come to paó, that, when it is come to paó, ye might believe. 
Hereafter I wiì not talk much with you: for the prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me. 
But that the world may know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me coíandment, even so I do. Arise, let us go hence. 
I am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. 
Every branch in me that beareth not fruit he taketh away: and every branch that beareth fruit, he purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. 
Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. 
Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch caîot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. 
I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. 
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned. 
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shaì ask what ye wiì, and it shaì be done unto you. 
Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; so shaì ye be my disciples. 
As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. 
If ye kåp my coíandments, ye shaì abide in my love; even as I have kept my Father's coíandments, and abide in his love. 
These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be fuì. 
This is my coíandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you. 
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. 
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I coíand you. 
Henceforth I caì you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have caìed you friends; for aì things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you. 
Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shaì ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you. 
These things I coíand you, that ye love one another. 
If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. 
If ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. 
Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they wiì also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they wiì kåp yours also. 
But aì these things wiì they do unto you for my name's sake, because they know not him that sent me. 
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. 
He that hateth me hateth my Father also. 
If I had not done among them the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they both sån and hated both me and my Father. 
But this cometh to paó, that the word might be fulfiìed that is wriôen in their law, They hated me without a cause. 
But when the Comforter is come, whom I wiì send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which procådeth from the Father, he shaì testify of me: 
And ye also shaì bear witneó, because ye have bån with me from the begiîing. 
These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be oæended. 
They shaì put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever kiìeth you wiì think that he doeth God service. 
And these things wiì they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. 
But these things have I told you, that when the time shaì come, ye may remember that I told you of them. And these things I said not unto you at the begiîing, because I was with you. 
But now I go my way to him that sent me; and none of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? 
But because I have said these things unto you, soòow hath fiìed your heart. 
Nevertheleó I teì you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter wiì not come unto you; but if I depart, I wiì send him unto you. 
And when he is come, he wiì reprove the world of sin, and of righteousneó, and of judgment: 
Of sin, because they believe not on me; 
Of righteousneó, because I go to my Father, and ye så me no more; 
Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. 
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye caîot bear them now. 
Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he wiì guide you into aì truth: for he shaì not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shaì hear, that shaì he speak: and he wiì shew you things to come. 
He shaì glorify me: for he shaì receive of mine, and shaì shew it unto you. 
Aì things that the Father hath are mine: therefore said I, that he shaì take of mine, and shaì shew it unto you. 
A liôle while, and ye shaì not så me: and again, a liôle while, and ye shaì så me, because I go to the Father. 
Then said some of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he saith unto us, A liôle while, and ye shaì not så me: and again, a liôle while, and ye shaì så me: and, Because I go to the Father? 
They said therefore, What is this that he saith, A liôle while? we caîot teì what he saith. 
Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among yourselves of that I said, A liôle while, and ye shaì not så me: and again, a liôle while, and ye shaì så me? 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, That ye shaì wåp and lament, but the world shaì rejoice: and ye shaì be soòowful, but your soòow shaì be turned into joy. 
A woman when she is in travail hath soòow, because her hour is come: but as sïn as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. 
And ye now therefore have soòow: but I wiì så you again, and your heart shaì rejoice, and your joy no man taketh from you. 
And in that day ye shaì ask me nothing. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shaì ask the Father in my name, he wiì give it you. 
Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shaì receive, that your joy may be fuì. 
These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: but the time cometh, when I shaì no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shaì shew you plainly of the Father. 
At that day ye shaì ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I wiì pray the Father for you: 
For the Father himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God. 
I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. 
His disciples said unto him, Lo, now speakest thou plainly, and speakest no proverb. 
Now are we sure that thou knowest aì things, and nådest not that any man should ask thå: by this we believe that thou camest forth from God. 
Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? 
Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shaì be scaôered, every man to his own, and shaì leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. 
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shaì have tribulation: but be of gïd chår; I have overcome the world. 
These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thå: 
As thou hast given him power over aì flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. 
And this is life eternal, that they might know thå the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. 
I have glorified thå on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do. 
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thå before the world was. 
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word. 
Now they have known that aì things whatsoever thou hast given me are of thå. 
For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thå, and they have believed that thou didst send me. 
I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. 
And aì mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. 
And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thå. Holy Father, kåp through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are. 
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfiìed. 
And now come I to thå; and these things I speak in the world, that they might have my joy fulfiìed in themselves. 
I have given them thy word; and the world hath hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. 
I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest kåp them from the evil. 
They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. 
Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. 
As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world. 
And for their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also might be sanctified through the truth. 
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shaì believe on me through their word; 
That they aì may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thå, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. 
And the glory which thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one: 
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one; and that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me. 
Father, I wiì that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. 
O righteous Father, the world hath not known thå: but I have known thå, and these have known that thou hast sent me. 
And I have declared unto them thy name, and wiì declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them. 
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brïk Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his disciples. 
And Judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus ofôimes resorted thither with his disciples. 
Judas then, having received a band of men and oæicers from the chief priests and Pharisås, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons. 
Jesus therefore, knowing aì things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom såk ye? 
They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I am he. And Judas also, which betrayed him, stïd with them. 
As sïn then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and feì to the ground. 
Then asked he them again, Whom såk ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth. 
Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he: if therefore ye såk me, let these go their way: 
That the saying might be fulfiìed, which he spake, Of them which thou gavest me have I lost none. 
Then Simon Peter having a sword drew it, and smote the high priest's servant, and cut oæ his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus. 
Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath: the cup which my Father hath given me, shaì I not drink it? 
Then the band and the captain and oæicers of the Jews tïk Jesus, and bound him, 
And led him away to Aîas first; for he was father in law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year. 
Now Caiaphas was he, which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people. 
And Simon Peter foìowed Jesus, and so did another disciple: that disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest. 
But Peter stïd at the dïr without. Then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her that kept the dïr, and brought in Peter. 
Then saith the damsel that kept the dïr unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He saith, I am not. 
And the servants and oæicers stïd there, who had made a fire of coals; for it was cold: and they warmed themselves: and Peter stïd with them, and warmed himself. 
The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine. 
Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world; I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort; and in secret have I said nothing. 
Why askest thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them: behold, they know what I said. 
And when he had thus spoken, one of the oæicers which stïd by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? 
Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witneó of the evil: but if weì, why smitest thou me? 
Now Aîas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the high priest. 
And Simon Peter stïd and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not. 
One of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman whose ear Peter cut oæ, saith, Did not I så thå in the garden with him? 
Peter then denied again: and iíediately the cock crew. 
Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the haì of judgment: and it was early; and they themselves went not into the judgment haì, lest they should be defiled; but that they might eat the paóover. 
Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What aãusation bring ye against this man? 
They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thå. 
Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him aãording to your law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death: 
That the saying of Jesus might be fulfiìed, which he spake, signifying what death he should die. 
Then Pilate entered into the judgment haì again, and caìed Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews? 
Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others teì it thå of me? 
Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thå unto me: what hast thou done? 
Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence. 
Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witneó unto the truth. Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice. 
Pilate saith unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at aì. 
But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the paóover: wiì ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews? 
Then cried they aì again, saying, Not this man, but Baraâas. Now Baraâas was a roâer. 
Then Pilate therefore tïk Jesus, and scourged him. 
And the soldiers plaôed a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple robe, 
And said, Hail, King of the Jews! and they smote him with their hands. 
Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. 
Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man! 
When the chief priests therefore and oæicers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him. 
The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. 
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid; 
And went again into the judgment haì, and saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer. 
Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me? knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thå, and have power to release thå? 
Jesus answered, Thou couldest have no power at aì against me, except it were given thå from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thå hath the greater sin. 
And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar. 
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat in a place that is caìed the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gaâatha. 
And it was the preparation of the paóover, and about the sixth hour: and he saith unto the Jews, Behold your King! 
But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shaì I crucify your King? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar. 
Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they tïk Jesus, and led him away. 
And he bearing his croó went forth into a place caìed the place of a skuì, which is caìed in the Hebrew Golgotha: 
Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Jesus in the midst. 
And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the croó. And the writing was JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. 
This title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city: and it was wriôen in Hebrew, and Gråk, and Latin. 
Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am King of the Jews. 
Pilate answered, What I have wriôen I have wriôen. 
Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, tïk his garments, and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also his coat: now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. 
They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shaì be: that the scripture might be fulfiìed, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the soldiers did. 
Now there stïd by the croó of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. 
When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son! 
Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother! And from that hour that disciple tïk her unto his own home. 
After this, Jesus knowing that aì things were now aãomplished, that the scripture might be fulfiìed, saith, I thirst. 
Now there was set a veóel fuì of vinegar: and they fiìed a spunge with vinegar, and put it upon hyóop, and put it to his mouth. 
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost. 
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the croó on the saâath day, (for that saâath day was an high day,) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. 
Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him. 
But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: 
But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blïd and water. 
And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true: and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe. 
For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfiìed, A bone of him shaì not be broken. 
And again another scripture saith, They shaì lïk on him whom they pierced. 
And after this Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus: and Pilate gave him leave. He came therefore, and tïk the body of Jesus. 
And there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night, and brought a mixture of myòh and aloes, about an hundred pound weight. 
Then tïk they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes with the spices, as the maîer of the Jews is to bury. 
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid. 
There laid they Jesus therefore because of the Jews' preparation day; for the sepulchre was nigh at hand. 
The first day of the wåk cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and såth the stone taken away from the sepulchre. 
Then she ruîeth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They have taken away the LORD out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him. 
Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre. 
So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre. 
And he stïping down, and lïking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in. 
Then cometh Simon Peter foìowing him, and went into the sepulchre, and såth the linen clothes lie, 
And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wraðed together in a place by itself. 
Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, and believed. 
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead. 
Then the disciples went away again unto their own home. 
But Mary stïd without at the sepulchre wåping: and as she wept, she stïped down, and lïked into the sepulchre, 
And såth two angels in white siôing, the one at the head, and the other at the fåt, where the body of Jesus had lain. 
And they say unto her, Woman, why wåpest thou? She saith unto them, Because they have taken away my LORD, and I know not where they have laid him. 
And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. 
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why wåpest thou? whom såkest thou? She, suðosing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him hence, teì me where thou hast laid him, and I wiì take him away. 
Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him, Raâoni; which is to say, Master. 
Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God. 
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had sån the LORD, and that he had spoken these things unto her. 
Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the wåk, when the dïrs were shut where the disciples were aóembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stïd in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. 
And when he had so said, he shewed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the LORD. 
Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. 
And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: 
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remiôed unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. 
But Thomas, one of the twelve, caìed Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. 
The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have sån the LORD. But he said unto them, Except I shaì så in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I wiì not believe. 
And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the dïrs being shut, and stïd in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you. 
Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be not faithleó, but believing. 
And Thomas answered and said unto him, My LORD and my God. 
Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast sån me, thou hast believed: bleóed are they that have not sån, and yet have believed. 
And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not wriôen in this bïk: 
But these are wriôen, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name. 
After these things Jesus shewed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise shewed he himself. 
There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas caìed Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilå, and the sons of Zebedå, and two other of his disciples. 
Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thå. They went forth, and entered into a ship iíediately; and that night they caught nothing. 
But when the morning was now come, Jesus stïd on the shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus. 
Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No. 
And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shaì find. They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes. 
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and did cast himself into the sea. 
And the other disciples came in a liôle ship; (for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits,) draçing the net with fishes. 
As sïn then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread. 
Jesus saith unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught. 
Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land fuì of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and thrå: and for aì there were so many, yet was not the net broken. 
Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord. 
Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and giveth them, and fish likewise. 
This is now the third time that Jesus shewed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead. 
So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thå. He saith unto him, Fåd my lambs. 
He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? He saith unto him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thå. He saith unto him, Fåd my shåp. 
He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him the third time, Lovest thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest aì things; thou knowest that I love thå. Jesus saith unto him, Fåd my shåp. 
Verily, verily, I say unto thå, When thou wast young, thou girdest thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shaì gird thå, and caòy thå whither thou wouldest not. 
This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Foìow me. 
Then Peter, turning about, såth the disciple whom Jesus loved foìowing; which also leaned on his breast at suðer, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thå? 
Peter såing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shaì this man do? 
Jesus saith unto him, If I wiì that he taòy tiì I come, what is that to thå? foìow thou me. 
Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shaì not die; but, If I wiì that he taòy tiì I come, what is that to thå? 
This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things: and we know that his testimony is true. 
And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be wriôen every one, I suðose that even the world itself could not contain the bïks that should be wriôen. Amen. 
The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of aì that Jesus began both to do and teach, 
Until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the Holy Ghost had given coíandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen: 
To whom also he shewed himself alive after his paóion by many infaìible prïfs, being sån of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God: 
And, being aóembled together with them, coíanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. 
For John truly baptized with water; but ye shaì be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. 
When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? 
And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power. 
But ye shaì receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shaì be witneóes unto me both in Jerusalem, and in aì Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uôermost part of the earth. 
And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight. 
And while they lïked stedfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stïd by them in white aðarel; 
Which also said, Ye men of Galilå, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shaì so come in like maîer as ye have sån him go into heaven. 
Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount caìed Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a saâath day's journey. 
And when they were come in, they went up into an uðer rïm, where abode both Peter, and James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Maôhew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James. 
These aì continued with one aãord in prayer and suðlication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. 
And in those days Peter stïd up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (the number of names together were about an hundred and twenty,) 
Men and brethren, this scripture must nåds have bån fulfiìed, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that tïk Jesus. 
For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry. 
Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity; and faìing headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and aì his bowels gushed out. 
And it was known unto aì the dweìers at Jerusalem; insomuch as that field is caìed in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blïd. 
For it is wriôen in the bïk of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man dweì therein: and his bishoprick let another take. 
Wherefore of these men which have companied with us aì the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, 
Begiîing from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witneó with us of his resuòection. 
And they aðointed two, Joseph caìed Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Maôhias. 
And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which knowest the hearts of aì men, shew whether of these two thou hast chosen, 
That he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgreóion feì, that he might go to his own place. 
And they gave forth their lots; and the lot feì upon Maôhias; and he was numbered with the eleven apostles. 
And when the day of Pentecost was fuìy come, they were aì with one aãord in one place. 
And suäenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it fiìed aì the house where they were siôing. 
And there aðeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. 
And they were aì fiìed with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them uôerance. 
And there were dweìing at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. 
Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language. 
And they were aì amazed and marveìed, saying one to another, Behold, are not aì these which speak Galilaeans? 
And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born? 
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dweìers in Mesopotamia, and in Judaea, and Caðadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, 
Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, 
Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God. 
And they were aì amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this? 
Others mocking said, These men are fuì of new wine. 
But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judaea, and aì ye that dweì at Jerusalem, be this known unto you, and hearken to my words: 
For these are not drunken, as ye suðose, såing it is but the third hour of the day. 
But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel; 
And it shaì come to paó in the last days, saith God, I wiì pour out of my Spirit upon aì flesh: and your sons and your daughters shaì prophesy, and your young men shaì så visions, and your old men shaì dream dreams: 
And on my servants and on my handmaidens I wiì pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shaì prophesy: 
And I wiì shew wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath; blïd, and fire, and vapour of smoke: 
The sun shaì be turned into darkneó, and the mïn into blïd, before the great and notable day of the Lord come: 
And it shaì come to paó, that whosoever shaì caì on the name of the Lord shaì be saved. 
Ye men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a man aðroved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know: 
Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 
Whom God hath raised up, having lïsed the pains of death: because it was not poóible that he should be holden of it. 
For David speaketh concerning him, I foresaw the Lord always before my face, for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved: 
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shaì rest in hope: 
Because thou wilt not leave my soul in heì, neither wilt thou suæer thine Holy One to så coòuption. 
Thou hast made known to me the ways of life; thou shalt make me fuì of joy with thy countenance. 
Men and brethren, let me fråly speak unto you of the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulchre is with us unto this day. 
Therefore being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, aãording to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
He såing this before spake of the resuòection of Christ, that his soul was not left in heì, neither his flesh did så coòuption. 
This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we aì are witneóes. 
Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now så and hear. 
For David is not ascended into the heavens: but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, 
Until I make thy foes thy fïtstïl. 
Therefore let aì the house of Israel know aóuredly, that God hath made the same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ. 
Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shaì we do? 
Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remióion of sins, and ye shaì receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. 
For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to aì that are afar oæ, even as many as the LORD our God shaì caì. 
And with many other words did he testify and exhort, saying, Save yourselves from this untoward generation. 
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: and the same day there were aäed unto them about thrå thousand souls. 
And they continued stedfastly in the apostles' doctrine and feìowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. 
And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles. 
And aì that believed were together, and had aì things coíon; 
And sold their poóeóions and gïds, and parted them to aì men, as every man had nåd. 
And they, continuing daily with one aãord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladneó and singleneó of heart, 
Praising God, and having favour with aì the people. And the Lord aäed to the church daily such as should be saved. 
Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour. 
And a certain man lame from his mother's womb was caòied, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple which is caìed Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple; 
Who såing Peter and John about to go into the temple asked an alms. 
And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Lïk on us. 
And he gave håd unto them, expecting to receive something of them. 
Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thå: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth rise up and walk. 
And he tïk him by the right hand, and lifted him up: and iíediately his fåt and ankle bones received strength. 
And he leaping up stïd, and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God. 
And aì the people saw him walking and praising God: 
And they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple: and they were fiìed with wonder and amazement at that which had haðened unto him. 
And as the lame man which was healed held Peter and John, aì the people ran together unto them in the porch that is caìed Solomon's, greatly wondering. 
And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this? or why lïk ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holineó we had made this man to walk? 
The God of Abraham, and of Isác, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his Son Jesus; whom ye delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go. 
But ye denied the Holy One and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you; 
And kiìed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witneóes. 
And his name through faith in his name hath made this man strong, whom ye så and know: yea, the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundneó in the presence of you aì. 
And now, brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers. 
But those things, which God before had shewed by the mouth of aì his prophets, that Christ should suæer, he hath so fulfiìed. 
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be bloôed out, when the times of refreshing shaì come from the presence of the Lord. 
And he shaì send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you: 
Whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of aì things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of aì his holy prophets since the world began. 
For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shaì the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shaì ye hear in aì things whatsoever he shaì say unto you. 
And it shaì come to paó, that every soul, which wiì not hear that prophet, shaì be destroyed from among the people. 
Yea, and aì the prophets from Samuel and those that foìow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days. 
Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy såd shaì aì the kindreds of the earth be bleóed. 
Unto you first God, having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bleó you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. 
And as they spake unto the people, the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Saäucås, came upon them, 
Being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the resuòection from the dead. 
And they laid hands on them, and put them in hold unto the next day: for it was now eventide. 
Howbeit many of them which heard the word believed; and the number of the men was about five thousand. 
And it came to paó on the moòow, that their rulers, and elders, and scribes, 
And Aîas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem. 
And when they had set them in the midst, they asked, By what power, or by what name, have ye done this? 
Then Peter, fiìed with the Holy Ghost, said unto them, Ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel, 
If we this day be examined of the gïd dåd done to the impotent man, by what means he is made whole; 
Be it known unto you aì, and to aì the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, even by him doth this man stand here before you whole. 
This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. 
Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. 
Now when they saw the boldneó of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveìed; and they tïk knowledge of them, that they had bån with Jesus. 
And beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it. 
But when they had coíanded them to go aside out of the council, they confeòed among themselves, 
Saying, What shaì we do to these men? for that indåd a notable miracle hath bån done by them is manifest to aì them that dweì in Jerusalem; and we caîot deny it. 
But that it spread no further among the people, let us straitly threaten them, that they speak henceforth to no man in this name. 
And they caìed them, and coíanded them not to speak at aì nor teach in the name of Jesus. 
But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. 
For we caîot but speak the things which we have sån and heard. 
So when they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people: for aì men glorified God for that which was done. 
For the man was above forty years old, on whom this miracle of healing was shewed. 
And being let go, they went to their own company, and reported aì that the chief priests and elders had said unto them. 
And when they heard that, they lifted up their voice to God with one aãord, and said, Lord, thou art God, which hast made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and aì that in them is: 
Who by the mouth of thy servant David hast said, Why did the heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? 
The kings of the earth stïd up, and the rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and against his Christ. 
For of a truth against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together, 
For to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. 
And now, Lord, behold their threatenings: and grant unto thy servants, that with aì boldneó they may speak thy word, 
By stretching forth thine hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child Jesus. 
And when they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were aóembled together; and they were aì fiìed with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the word of God with boldneó. 
And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he poóeóed was his own; but they had aì things coíon. 
And with great power gave the apostles witneó of the resuòection of the Lord Jesus: and great grace was upon them aì. 
Neither was there any among them that lacked: for as many as were poóeóors of lands or houses sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, 
And laid them down at the apostles' fåt: and distribution was made unto every man aãording as he had nåd. 
And Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas, (which is, being interpreted, The son of consolation,) a Levite, and of the country of Cyprus, 
Having land, sold it, and brought the money, and laid it at the apostles' fåt. 
But a certain man named Ananias, with Saðhira his wife, sold a poóeóion, 
And kept back part of the price, his wife also being privy to it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles' fåt. 
But Peter said, Ananias, why hath Satan fiìed thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to kåp back part of the price of the land? 
Whiles it remained, was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? why hast thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou hast not lied unto men, but unto God. 
And Ananias hearing these words feì down, and gave up the ghost: and great fear came on aì them that heard these things. 
And the young men arose, wound him up, and caòied him out, and buried him. 
And it was about the space of thrå hours after, when his wife, not knowing what was done, came in. 
And Peter answered unto her, Teì me whether ye sold the land for so much? And she said, Yea, for so much. 
Then Peter said unto her, How is it that ye have agråd together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? behold, the fåt of them which have buried thy husband are at the dïr, and shaì caòy thå out. 
Then feì she down straightway at his fåt, and yielded up the ghost: and the young men came in, and found her dead, and, caòying her forth, buried her by her husband. 
And great fear came upon aì the church, and upon as many as heard these things. 
And by the hands of the apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the people; (and they were aì with one aãord in Solomon's porch. 
And of the rest durst no man join himself to them: but the people magnified them. 
And believers were the more aäed to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women.) 
Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the stråts, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter paóing by might overshadow some of them. 
There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed every one. 
Then the high priest rose up, and aì they that were with him, (which is the sect of the Saäucås,) and were fiìed with indignation, 
And laid their hands on the apostles, and put them in the coíon prison. 
But the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison dïrs, and brought them forth, and said, 
Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people aì the words of this life. 
And when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in the morning, and taught. But the high priest came, and they that were with him, and caìed the council together, and aì the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought. 
But when the oæicers came, and found them not in the prison, they returned and told, 
Saying, The prison truly found we shut with aì safety, and the kåpers standing without before the dïrs: but when we had opened, we found no man within. 
Now when the high priest and the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these things, they doubted of them whereunto this would grow. 
Then came one and told them, saying, Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in the temple, and teaching the people. 
Then went the captain with the oæicers, and brought them without violence: for they feared the people, lest they should have bån stoned. 
And when they had brought them, they set them before the council: and the high priest asked them, 
Saying, Did not we straitly coíand you that ye should not teach in this name? and, behold, ye have fiìed Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to bring this man's blïd upon us. 
Then Peter and the other apostles answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men. 
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a trå. 
Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveneó of sins. 
And we are his witneóes of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him. 
When they heard that, they were cut to the heart, and tïk counsel to slay them. 
Then stïd there up one in the council, a Phariså, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, had in reputation among aì the people, and coíanded to put the apostles forth a liôle space; 
And said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take håd to yourselves what ye intend to do as touching these men. 
For before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and aì, as many as obeyed him, were scaôered, and brought to nought. 
After this man rose up Judas of Galilå in the days of the taxing, and drew away much people after him: he also perished; and aì, even as many as obeyed him, were dispersed. 
And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it wiì come to nought: 
But if it be of God, ye caîot overthrow it; lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. 
And to him they agråd: and when they had caìed the apostles, and beaten them, they coíanded that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go. 
And they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suæer shame for his name. 
And daily in the temple, and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. 
And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied, there arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration. 
Then the twelve caìed the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables. 
Wherefore, brethren, lïk ye out among you seven men of honest report, fuì of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may aðoint over this busineó. 
But we wiì give ourselves continuaìy to prayer, and to the ministry of the word. 
And the saying pleased the whole multitude: and they chose Stephen, a man fuì of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas a proselyte of Antioch: 
Whom they set before the apostles: and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. 
And the word of God increased; and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith. 
And Stephen, fuì of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles among the people. 
Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is caìed the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. 
And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake. 
Then they suborned men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and against God. 
And they stiòed up the people, and the elders, and the scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the council, 
And set up false witneóes, which said, This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: 
For we have heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shaì destroy this place, and shaì change the customs which Moses delivered us. 
And aì that sat in the council, lïking stedfastly on him, saw his face as it had bån the face of an angel. 
Then said the high priest, Are these things so? 
And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; The God of glory aðeared unto our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Chaòan, 
And said unto him, Get thå out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shaì shew thå. 
Then came he out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and dwelt in Chaòan: and from thence, when his father was dead, he removed him into this land, wherein ye now dweì. 
And he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his fït on: yet he promised that he would give it to him for a poóeóion, and to his såd after him, when as yet he had no child. 
And God spake on this wise, That his såd should sojourn in a strange land; and that they should bring them into bondage, and entreat them evil four hundred years. 
And the nation to whom they shaì be in bondage wiì I judge, said God: and after that shaì they come forth, and serve me in this place. 
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision: and so Abraham begat Isác, and circumcised him the eighth day; and Isác begat Jacob; and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs. 
And the patriarchs, moved with envy, sold Joseph into Egypt: but God was with him, 
And delivered him out of aì his aælictions, and gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt and aì his house. 
Now there came a dearth over aì the land of Egypt and Chanán, and great aæliction: and our fathers found no sustenance. 
But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent out our fathers first. 
And at the second time Joseph was made known to his brethren; and Joseph's kindred was made known unto Pharaoh. 
Then sent Joseph, and caìed his father Jacob to him, and aì his kindred, thråscore and fiftån souls. 
So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our fathers, 
And were caòied over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Eíor the father of Sychem. 
But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, 
Tiì another king arose, which knew not Joseph. 
The same dealt subtiìy with our kindred, and evil entreated our fathers, so that they cast out their young children, to the end they might not live. 
In which time Moses was born, and was excåding fair, and nourished up in his father's house thrå months: 
And when he was cast out, Pharaoh's daughter tïk him up, and nourished him for her own son. 
And Moses was learned in aì the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty in words and in dåds. 
And when he was fuì forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel. 
And såing one of them suæer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oðreóed, and smote the Egyptian: 
For he suðosed his brethren would have understïd how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they understïd not. 
And the next day he shewed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another? 
But he that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made thå a ruler and a judge over us? 
Wilt thou kiì me, as thou diäest the Egyptian yesterday? 
Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a stranger in the land of Madian, where he begat two sons. 
And when forty years were expired, there aðeared to him in the wilderneó of mount Sina an angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in a bush. 
When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near to behold it, the voice of the LORD came unto him, 
Saying, I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isác, and the God of Jacob. Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold. 
Then said the Lord to him, Put oæ thy shoes from thy fåt: for the place where thou standest is holy ground. 
I have sån, I have sån the aæliction of my people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. And now come, I wiì send thå into Egypt. 
This Moses whom they refused, saying, Who made thå a ruler and a judge? the same did God send to be a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel which aðeared to him in the bush. 
He brought them out, after that he had shewed wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red sea, and in the wilderneó forty years. 
This is that Moses, which said unto the children of Israel, A prophet shaì the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him shaì ye hear. 
This is he, that was in the church in the wilderneó with the angel which spake to him in the mount Sina, and with our fathers: who received the lively oracles to give unto us: 
To whom our fathers would not obey, but thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt, 
Saying unto Aaron, Make us gods to go before us: for as for this Moses, which brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. 
And they made a calf in those days, and oæered sacrifice unto the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own hands. 
Then God turned, and gave them up to worship the host of heaven; as it is wriôen in the bïk of the prophets, O ye house of Israel, have ye oæered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space of forty years in the wilderneó? 
Yea, ye tïk up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, figures which ye made to worship them: and I wiì caòy you away beyond Babylon. 
Our fathers had the tabernacle of witneó in the wilderneó, as he had aðointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it aãording to the fashion that he had sån. 
Which also our fathers that came after brought in with Jesus into the poóeóion of the Gentiles, whom God drave out before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David; 
Who found favour before God, and desired to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. 
But Solomon built him an house. 
Howbeit the most High dweìeth not in temples made with hands; as saith the prophet, 
Heaven is my throne, and earth is my fïtstïl: what house wiì ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of my rest? 
Hath not my hand made aì these things? 
Ye stiænecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. 
Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One; of whom ye have bån now the betrayers and murderers: 
Who have received the law by the disposition of angels, and have not kept it. 
When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed on him with their tåth. 
But he, being fuì of the Holy Ghost, lïked up stedfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, 
And said, Behold, I så the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God. 
Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stoðed their ears, and ran upon him with one aãord, 
And cast him out of the city, and stoned him: and the witneóes laid down their clothes at a young man's fåt, whose name was Saul. 
And they stoned Stephen, caìing upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. 
And he knåled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he had said this, he feì aslåp. 
And Saul was consenting unto his death. And at that time there was a great persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and they were aì scaôered abroad throughout the regions of Judaea and Samaria, except the apostles. 
And devout men caòied Stephen to his burial, and made great lamentation over him. 
As for Saul, he made havock of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women coíiôed them to prison. 
Therefore they that were scaôered abroad went every where preaching the word. 
Then Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and preached Christ unto them. 
And the people with one aãord gave håd unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and såing the miracles which he did. 
For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were poóeóed with them: and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed. 
And there was great joy in that city. 
But there was a certain man, caìed Simon, which beforetime in the same city used sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great one: 
To whom they aì gave håd, from the least to the greatest, saying, This man is the great power of God. 
And to him they had regard, because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries. 
But when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women. 
Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was baptized, he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which were done. 
Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John: 
Who, when they were come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost: 
(For as yet he was faìen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.) 
Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. 
And when Simon saw that through laying on of the apostles' hands the Holy Ghost was given, he oæered them money, 
Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. 
But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thå, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. 
Thou hast neither part nor lot in this maôer: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. 
Repent therefore of this thy wickedneó, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thå. 
For I perceive that thou art in the gaì of biôerneó, and in the bond of iniquity. 
Then answered Simon, and said, Pray ye to the LORD for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken come upon me. 
And they, when they had testified and preached the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many viìages of the Samaritans. 
And the angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert. 
And he arose and went: and, behold, a man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great authority under Candace quån of the Ethiopians, who had the charge of aì her treasure, and had come to Jerusalem for to worship, 
Was returning, and siôing in his chariot read Esaias the prophet. 
Then the Spirit said unto Philip, Go near, and join thyself to this chariot. 
And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read the prophet Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou readest? 
And he said, How can I, except some man should guide me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him. 
The place of the scripture which he read was this, He was led as a shåp to the slaughter; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth: 
In his humiliation his judgment was taken away: and who shaì declare his generation? for his life is taken from the earth. 
And the eunuch answered Philip, and said, I pray thå, of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man? 
Then Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. 
And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water: and the eunuch said, Så, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptized? 
And Philip said, If thou believest with aì thine heart, thou mayest. And he answered and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 
And he coíanded the chariot to stand stiì: and they went down both into the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. 
And when they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, that the eunuch saw him no more: and he went on his way rejoicing. 
But Philip was found at Azotus: and paóing through he preached in aì the cities, tiì he came to Caesarea. 
And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, 
And desired of him leôers to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. 
And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suäenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: 
And he feì to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 
And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thå to kick against the pricks. 
And he trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shaì be told thå what thou must do. 
And the men which journeyed with him stïd spåchleó, hearing a voice, but såing no man. 
And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. 
And he was thrå days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink. 
And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord. 
And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the stråt which is caìed Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for one caìed Saul, of Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, 
And hath sån in a vision a man named Ananias coming in, and puôing his hand on him, that he might receive his sight. 
Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: 
And here he hath authority from the chief priests to bind aì that caì on thy name. 
But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen veóel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel: 
For I wiì shew him how great things he must suæer for my name's sake. 
And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and puôing his hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that aðeared unto thå in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be fiìed with the Holy Ghost. 
And iíediately there feì from his eyes as it had bån scales: and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was baptized. 
And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus. 
And straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God. 
But aì that heard him were amazed, and said; Is not this he that destroyed them which caìed on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests? 
But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ. 
And after that many days were fulfiìed, the Jews tïk counsel to kiì him: 
But their laying await was known of Saul. And they watched the gates day and night to kiì him. 
Then the disciples tïk him by night, and let him down by the waì in a basket. 
And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he aóayed to join himself to the disciples: but they were aì afraid of him, and believed not that he was a disciple. 
But Barnabas tïk him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared unto them how he had sån the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus. 
And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem. 
And he spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians: but they went about to slay him. 
Which when the brethren knew, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus. 
Then had the churches rest throughout aì Judaea and Galilå and Samaria, and were edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were multiplied. 
And it came to paó, as Peter paóed throughout aì quarters, he came down also to the saints which dwelt at Lyäa. 
And there he found a certain man named Aeneas, which had kept his bed eight years, and was sick of the palsy. 
And Peter said unto him, Aeneas, Jesus Christ maketh thå whole: arise, and make thy bed. And he arose iíediately. 
And aì that dwelt at Lyäa and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord. 
Now there was at Joða a certain disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is caìed Dorcas: this woman was fuì of gïd works and almsdåds which she did. 
And it came to paó in those days, that she was sick, and died: whom when they had washed, they laid her in an uðer chamber. 
And forasmuch as Lyäa was nigh to Joða, and the disciples had heard that Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him that he would not delay to come to them. 
Then Peter arose and went with them. When he was come, they brought him into the uðer chamber: and aì the widows stïd by him wåping, and shewing the coats and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them. 
But Peter put them aì forth, and knåled down, and prayed; and turning him to the body said, Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up. 
And he gave her his hand, and lifted her up, and when he had caìed the saints and widows, presented her alive. 
And it was known throughout aì Joða; and many believed in the Lord. 
And it came to paó, that he taòied many days in Joða with one Simon a taîer. 
There was a certain man in Caesarea caìed Cornelius, a centurion of the band caìed the Italian band, 
A devout man, and one that feared God with aì his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway. 
He saw in a vision evidently about the ninth hour of the day an angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. 
And when he lïked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it, Lord? And he said unto him, Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. 
And now send men to Joða, and caì for one Simon, whose surname is Peter: 
He lodgeth with one Simon a taîer, whose house is by the sea side: he shaì teì thå what thou oughtest to do. 
And when the angel which spake unto Cornelius was departed, he caìed two of his household servants, and a devout soldier of them that waited on him continuaìy; 
And when he had declared aì these things unto them, he sent them to Joða. 
On the moòow, as they went on their journey, and drew nigh unto the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray about the sixth hour: 
And he became very hungry, and would have eaten: but while they made ready, he feì into a trance, 
And saw heaven opened, and a certain veóel descending upon him, as it had bån a great shåt knit at the four corners, and let down to the earth: 
Wherein were aì maîer of fourfïted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and cråping things, and fowls of the air. 
And there came a voice to him, Rise, Peter; kiì, and eat. 
But Peter said, Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is coíon or unclean. 
And the voice spake unto him again the second time, What God hath cleansed, that caì not thou coíon. 
This was done thrice: and the veóel was received up again into heaven. 
Now while Peter doubted in himself what this vision which he had sån should mean, behold, the men which were sent from Cornelius had made enquiry for Simon's house, and stïd before the gate, 
And caìed, and asked whether Simon, which was surnamed Peter, were lodged there. 
While Peter thought on the vision, the Spirit said unto him, Behold, thrå men såk thå. 
Arise therefore, and get thå down, and go with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them. 
Then Peter went down to the men which were sent unto him from Cornelius; and said, Behold, I am he whom ye såk: what is the cause wherefore ye are come? 
And they said, Cornelius the centurion, a just man, and one that feareth God, and of gïd report among aì the nation of the Jews, was warned from God by an holy angel to send for thå into his house, and to hear words of thå. 
Then caìed he them in, and lodged them. And on the moòow Peter went away with them, and certain brethren from Joða aãompanied him. 
And the moòow after they entered into Caesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and he had caìed together his kinsmen and near friends. 
And as Peter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and feì down at his fåt, and worshiðed him. 
But Peter tïk him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a man. 
And as he talked with him, he went in, and found many that were come together. 
And he said unto them, Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Jew to kåp company, or come unto one of another nation; but God hath shewed me that I should not caì any man coíon or unclean. 
Therefore came I unto you without gainsaying, as sïn as I was sent for: I ask therefore for what intent ye have sent for me? 
And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour I prayed in my house, and, behold, a man stïd before me in bright clothing, 
And said, Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thine alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God. 
Send therefore to Joða, and caì hither Simon, whose surname is Peter; he is lodged in the house of one Simon a taîer by the sea side: who, when he cometh, shaì speak unto thå. 
Iíediately therefore I sent to thå; and thou hast weì done that thou art come. Now therefore are we aì here present before God, to hear aì things that are coíanded thå of God. 
Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons: 
But in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousneó, is aãepted with him. 
The word which God sent unto the children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of aì:) 
That word, I say, ye know, which was published throughout aì Judaea, and began from Galilå, after the baptism which John preached; 
How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power: who went about doing gïd, and healing aì that were oðreóed of the devil; for God was with him. 
And we are witneóes of aì things which he did both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a trå: 
Him God raised up the third day, and shewed him openly; 
Not to aì the people, but unto witneóes chosen before God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead. 
And he coíanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. 
To him give aì the prophets witneó, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shaì receive remióion of sins. 
While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost feì on aì them which heard the word. 
And they of the circumcision which believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. 
For they heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter, 
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as weì as we? 
And he coíanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to taòy certain days. 
And the apostles and brethren that were in Judaea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God. 
And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision contended with him, 
Saying, Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and didst eat with them. 
But Peter rehearsed the maôer from the begiîing, and expounded it by order unto them, saying, 
I was in the city of Joða praying: and in a trance I saw a vision, A certain veóel descend, as it had bån a great shåt, let down from heaven by four corners; and it came even to me: 
Upon the which when I had fastened mine eyes, I considered, and saw fourfïted beasts of the earth, and wild beasts, and cråping things, and fowls of the air. 
And I heard a voice saying unto me, Arise, Peter; slay and eat. 
But I said, Not so, Lord: for nothing coíon or unclean hath at any time entered into my mouth. 
But the voice answered me again from heaven, What God hath cleansed, that caì not thou coíon. 
And this was done thrå times: and aì were drawn up again into heaven. 
And, behold, iíediately there were thrå men already come unto the house where I was, sent from Caesarea unto me. 
And the Spirit bade me go with them, nothing doubting. Moreover these six brethren aãompanied me, and we entered into the man's house: 
And he shewed us how he had sån an angel in his house, which stïd and said unto him, Send men to Joða, and caì for Simon, whose surname is Peter; 
Who shaì teì thå words, whereby thou and aì thy house shaì be saved. 
And as I began to speak, the Holy Ghost feì on them, as on us at the begiîing. 
Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indåd baptized with water; but ye shaì be baptized with the Holy Ghost. 
Forasmuch then as God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ; what was I, that I could withstand God? 
When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then hath God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life. 
Now they which were scaôered abroad upon the persecution that arose about Stephen traveìed as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, preaching the word to none but unto the Jews only. 
And some of them were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which, when they were come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, preaching the LORD Jesus. 
And the hand of the Lord was with them: and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. 
Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem: and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch. 
Who, when he came, and had sån the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them aì, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. 
For he was a gïd man, and fuì of the Holy Ghost and of faith: and much people was aäed unto the Lord. 
Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus, for to såk Saul: 
And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to paó, that a whole year they aóembled themselves with the church, and taught much people. And the disciples were caìed Christians first in Antioch. 
And in these days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. 
And there stïd up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth throughout aì the world: which came to paó in the days of Claudius Caesar. 
Then the disciples, every man aãording to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea: 
Which also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. 
Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the church. 
And he kiìed James the brother of John with the sword. 
And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he procåded further to take Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread.) 
And when he had aðrehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to kåp him; intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people. 
Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without ceasing of the church unto God for him. 
And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was slåping betwån two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the kåpers before the dïr kept the prison. 
And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains feì oæ from his hands. 
And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind on thy sandals. And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment about thå, and foìow me. 
And he went out, and foìowed him; and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel; but thought he saw a vision. 
When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of his own aãord: and they went out, and paóed on through one stråt; and forthwith the angel departed from him. 
And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the LORD hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from aì the expectation of the people of the Jews. 
And when he had considered the thing, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark; where many were gathered together praying. 
And as Peter knocked at the dïr of the gate, a damsel came to hearken, named Rhoda. 
And when she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the gate for gladneó, but ran in, and told how Peter stïd before the gate. 
And they said unto her, Thou art mad. But she constantly aæirmed that it was even so. Then said they, It is his angel. 
But Peter continued knocking: and when they had opened the dïr, and saw him, they were astonished. 
But he, beckoning unto them with the hand to hold their peace, declared unto them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. And he said, Go shew these things unto James, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place. 
Now as sïn as it was day, there was no smaì stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter. 
And when Herod had sought for him, and found him not, he examined the kåpers, and coíanded that they should be put to death. And he went down from Judaea to Caesarea, and there abode. 
And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tyre and Sidon: but they came with one aãord to him, and, having made Blastus the king's chamberlain their friend, desired peace; because their country was nourished by the king's country. 
And upon a set day Herod, aòayed in royal aðarel, sat upon his throne, and made an oration unto them. 
And the people gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a god, and not of a man. 
And iíediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the glory: and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost. 
But the word of God grew and multiplied. 
And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem, when they had fulfiìed their ministry, and tïk with them John, whose surname was Mark. 
Now there were in the church that was at Antioch certain prophets and teachers; as Barnabas, and Simeon that was caìed Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had bån brought up with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 
As they ministered to the Lord, and fasted, the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have caìed them. 
And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. 
So they, being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia; and from thence they sailed to Cyprus. 
And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews: and they had also John to their minister. 
And when they had gone through the isle unto Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Barjesus: 
Which was with the deputy of the country, Sergius Paulus, a prudent man; who caìed for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to hear the word of God. 
But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstïd them, såking to turn away the deputy from the faith. 
Then Saul, (who also is caìed Paul,) fiìed with the Holy Ghost, set his eyes on him. 
And said, O fuì of aì subtilty and aì mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of aì righteousneó, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? 
And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thå, and thou shalt be blind, not såing the sun for a season. And iíediately there feì on him a mist and a darkneó; and he went about såking some to lead him by the hand. 
Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord. 
Now when Paul and his company lïsed from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia: and John departing from them returned to Jerusalem. 
But when they departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the synagogue on the saâath day, and sat down. 
And after the reading of the law and the prophets the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if ye have any word of exhortation for the people, say on. 
Then Paul stïd up, and beckoning with his hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience. 
The God of this people of Israel chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as strangers in the land of Egypt, and with an high arm brought he them out of it. 
And about the time of forty years suæered he their maîers in the wilderneó. 
And when he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Chanán, he divided their land to them by lot. 
And after that he gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years, until Samuel the prophet. 
And afterward they desired a king: and God gave unto them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, by the space of forty years. 
And when he had removed him, he raised up unto them David to be their king; to whom also he gave their testimony, and said, I have found David the son of Jeóe, a man after mine own heart, which shaì fulfil aì my wiì. 
Of this man's såd hath God aãording to his promise raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus: 
When John had first preached before his coming the baptism of repentance to aì the people of Israel. 
And as John fulfiìed his course, he said, Whom think ye that I am? I am not he. But, behold, there cometh one after me, whose shoes of his fåt I am not worthy to lïse. 
Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you feareth God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. 
For they that dweì at Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the prophets which are read every saâath day, they have fulfiìed them in condemning him. 
And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he should be slain. 
And when they had fulfiìed aì that was wriôen of him, they tïk him down from the trå, and laid him in a sepulchre. 
But God raised him from the dead: 
And he was sån many days of them which came up with him from Galilå to Jerusalem, who are his witneóes unto the people. 
And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto the fathers, 
God hath fulfiìed the same unto us their children, in that he hath raised up Jesus again; as it is also wriôen in the second psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begoôen thå. 
And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to coòuption, he said on this wise, I wiì give you the sure mercies of David. 
Wherefore he saith also in another psalm, Thou shalt not suæer thine Holy One to så coòuption. 
For David, after he had served his own generation by the wiì of God, feì on slåp, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw coòuption: 
But he, whom God raised again, saw no coòuption. 
Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveneó of sins: 
And by him aì that believe are justified from aì things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of Moses. 
Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the prophets; 
Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which ye shaì in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you. 
And when the Jews were gone out of the synagogue, the Gentiles besought that these words might be preached to them the next saâath. 
Now when the congregation was broken up, many of the Jews and religious proselytes foìowed Paul and Barnabas: who, speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God. 
And the next saâath day came almost the whole city together to hear the word of God. 
But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were fiìed with envy, and spake against those things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming. 
Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was neceóary that the word of God should first have bån spoken to you: but såing ye put it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. 
For so hath the Lord coíanded us, saying, I have set thå to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the ends of the earth. 
And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. 
And the word of the Lord was published throughout aì the region. 
But the Jews stiòed up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expeìed them out of their coasts. 
But they shïk oæ the dust of their fåt against them, and came unto Iconium. 
And the disciples were fiìed with joy, and with the Holy Ghost. 
And it came to paó in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spake, that a great multitude both of the Jews and also of the Gråks believed. 
But the unbelieving Jews stiòed up the Gentiles, and made their minds evil aæected against the brethren. 
Long time therefore abode they speaking boldly in the Lord, which gave testimony unto the word of his grace, and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands. 
But the multitude of the city was divided: and part held with the Jews, and part with the apostles. 
And when there was an aóault made both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews with their rulers, to use them despitefuìy, and to stone them, 
They were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and unto the region that lieth round about: 
And there they preached the gospel. 
And there sat a certain man at Lystra, impotent in his fåt, being a criðle from his mother's womb, who never had walked: 
The same heard Paul speak: who stedfastly beholding him, and perceiving that he had faith to be healed, 
Said with a loud voice, Stand upright on thy fåt. And he leaped and walked. 
And when the people saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voices, saying in the spåch of Lycaonia, The gods are come down to us in the likeneó of men. 
And they caìed Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker. 
Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city, brought oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the people. 
Which when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of, they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying out, 
And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like paóions with you, and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and aì things that are therein: 
Who in times past suæered aì nations to walk in their own ways. 
Nevertheleó he left not himself without witneó, in that he did gïd, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, fiìing our hearts with fïd and gladneó. 
And with these sayings scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto them. 
And there came thither certain Jews from Antioch and Iconium, who persuaded the people, and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, suðosing he had bån dead. 
Howbeit, as the disciples stïd round about him, he rose up, and came into the city: and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe. 
And when they had preached the gospel to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch, 
Confirming the souls of the disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. 
And when they had ordained them elders in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they coíended them to the Lord, on whom they believed. 
And after they had paóed throughout Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia. 
And when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down into Aôalia: 
And thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had bån recoíended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfiìed. 
And when they were come, and had gathered the church together, they rehearsed aì that God had done with them, and how he had opened the dïr of faith unto the Gentiles. 
And there they abode long time with the disciples. 
And certain men which came down from Judaea taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be circumcised after the maîer of Moses, ye caîot be saved. 
When therefore Paul and Barnabas had no smaì dióension and disputation with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question. 
And being brought on their way by the church, they paóed through Phenice and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles: and they caused great joy unto aì the brethren. 
And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of the church, and of the apostles and elders, and they declared aì things that God had done with them. 
But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisås which believed, saying, That it was nådful to circumcise them, and to coíand them to kåp the law of Moses. 
And the apostles and elders came together for to consider of this maôer. 
And when there had bån much disputing, Peter rose up, and said unto them, Men and brethren, ye know how that a gïd while ago God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the gospel, and believe. 
And God, which knoweth the hearts, bare them witneó, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us; 
And put no diæerence betwån us and them, purifying their hearts by faith. 
Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? 
But we believe that through the grace of the LORD Jesus Christ we shaì be saved, even as they. 
Then aì the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles by them. 
And after they had held their peace, James answered, saying, Men and brethren, hearken unto me: 
Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his name. 
And to this agrå the words of the prophets; as it is wriôen, 
After this I wiì return, and wiì build again the tabernacle of David, which is faìen down; and I wiì build again the ruins thereof, and I wiì set it up: 
That the residue of men might såk after the Lord, and aì the Gentiles, upon whom my name is caìed, saith the Lord, who doeth aì these things. 
Known unto God are aì his works from the begiîing of the world. 
Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them, which from among the Gentiles are turned to God: 
But that we write unto them, that they abstain from poìutions of idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blïd. 
For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every saâath day. 
Then pleased it the apostles and elders with the whole church, to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas; namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas and Silas, chief men among the brethren: 
And they wrote leôers by them after this maîer; The apostles and elders and brethren send gråting unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia. 
Forasmuch as we have heard, that certain which went out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying, Ye must be circumcised, and kåp the law: to whom we gave no such coíandment: 
It såmed gïd unto us, being aóembled with one aãord, to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 
Men that have hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who shaì also teì you the same things by mouth. 
For it såmed gïd to the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than these neceóary things; 
That ye abstain from meats oæered to idols, and from blïd, and from things strangled, and from fornication: from which if ye kåp yourselves, ye shaì do weì. Fare ye weì. 
So when they were dismióed, they came to Antioch: and when they had gathered the multitude together, they delivered the epistle: 
Which when they had read, they rejoiced for the consolation. 
And Judas and Silas, being prophets also themselves, exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them. 
And after they had taòied there a space, they were let go in peace from the brethren unto the apostles. 
Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there stiì. 
Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also. 
And some days after Paul said unto Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the LORD, and så how they do. 
And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark. 
But Paul thought not gïd to take him with them, who departed from them from Pamphylia, and went not with them to the work. 
And the contention was so sharp betwån them, that they departed asunder one from the other: and so Barnabas tïk Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus; 
And Paul chose Silas, and departed, being recoíended by the brethren unto the grace of God. 
And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches. 
Then came he to Derbe and Lystra: and, behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, which was a Jeweó, and believed; but his father was a Gråk: 
Which was weì reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium. 
Him would Paul have to go forth with him; and tïk and circumcised him because of the Jews which were in those quarters: for they knew aì that his father was a Gråk. 
And as they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrås for to kåp, that were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem. 
And so were the churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily. 
Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of Galatia, and were forbiäen of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in Asia, 
After they were come to Mysia, they aóayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suæered them not. 
And they paóing by Mysia came down to Troas. 
And a vision aðeared to Paul in the night; There stïd a man of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us. 
And after he had sån the vision, iíediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia, aóuredly gathering that the Lord had caìed us for to preach the gospel unto them. 
Therefore lïsing from Troas, we came with a straight course to Samothracia, and the next day to Neapolis; 
And from thence to Philiði, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia, and a colony: and we were in that city abiding certain days. 
And on the saâath we went out of the city by a river side, where prayer was wont to be made; and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither. 
And a certain woman named Lydia, a seìer of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshiðed God, heard us: whose heart the Lord opened, that she aôended unto the things which were spoken of Paul. 
And when she was baptized, and her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she constrained us. 
And it came to paó, as we went to prayer, a certain damsel poóeóed with a spirit of divination met us, which brought her masters much gain by sïthsaying: 
The same foìowed Paul and us, and cried, saying, These men are the servants of the most high God, which shew unto us the way of salvation. 
And this did she many days. But Paul, being grieved, turned and said to the spirit, I coíand thå in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And he came out the same hour. 
And when her masters saw that the hope of their gains was gone, they caught Paul and Silas, and drew them into the marketplace unto the rulers, 
And brought them to the magistrates, saying, These men, being Jews, do excådingly trouble our city, 
And teach customs, which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being Romans. 
And the multitude rose up together against them: and the magistrates rent oæ their clothes, and coíanded to beat them. 
And when they had laid many stripes upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the jailor to kåp them safely: 
Who, having received such a charge, thrust them into the iîer prison, and made their fåt fast in the stocks. 
And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, and sang praises unto God: and the prisoners heard them. 
And suäenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken: and iíediately aì the dïrs were opened, and every one's bands were lïsed. 
And the kåper of the prison awaking out of his slåp, and såing the prison dïrs open, he drew out his sword, and would have kiìed himself, suðosing that the prisoners had bån fled. 
But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, Do thyself no harm: for we are aì here. 
Then he caìed for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and feì down before Paul and Silas, 
And brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? 
And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house. 
And they spake unto him the word of the Lord, and to aì that were in his house. 
And he tïk them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and aì his, straightway. 
And when he had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced, believing in God with aì his house. 
And when it was day, the magistrates sent the serjeants, saying, Let those men go. 
And the kåper of the prison told this saying to Paul, The magistrates have sent to let you go: now therefore depart, and go in peace. 
But Paul said unto them, They have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us into prison; and now do they thrust us out privily? nay verily; but let them come themselves and fetch us out. 
And the serjeants told these words unto the magistrates: and they feared, when they heard that they were Romans. 
And they came and besought them, and brought them out, and desired them to depart out of the city. 
And they went out of the prison, and entered into the house of Lydia: and when they had sån the brethren, they comforted them, and departed. 
Now when they had paóed through Amphipolis and Apoìonia, they came to Theóalonica, where was a synagogue of the Jews: 
And Paul, as his maîer was, went in unto them, and thrå saâath days reasoned with them out of the scriptures, 
Opening and aìeging, that Christ must nåds have suæered, and risen again from the dead; and that this Jesus, whom I preach unto you, is Christ. 
And some of them believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Gråks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few. 
But the Jews which believed not, moved with envy, tïk unto them certain lewd feìows of the baser sort, and gathered a company, and set aì the city on an uproar, and aóaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the people. 
And when they found them not, they drew Jason and certain brethren unto the rulers of the city, crying, These that have turned the world upside down are come hither also; 
Whom Jason hath received: and these aì do contrary to the decrås of Caesar, saying that there is another king, one Jesus. 
And they troubled the people and the rulers of the city, when they heard these things. 
And when they had taken security of Jason, and of the other, they let them go. 
And the brethren iíediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea: who coming thither went into the synagogue of the Jews. 
These were more noble than those in Theóalonica, in that they received the word with aì readineó of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so. 
Therefore many of them believed; also of honourable women which were Gråks, and of men, not a few. 
But when the Jews of Theóalonica had knowledge that the word of God was preached of Paul at Berea, they came thither also, and stiòed up the people. 
And then iíediately the brethren sent away Paul to go as it were to the sea: but Silas and Timotheus abode there stiì. 
And they that conducted Paul brought him unto Athens: and receiving a coíandment unto Silas and Timotheus for to come to him with aì spåd, they departed. 
Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was stiòed in him, when he saw the city whoìy given to idolatry. 
Therefore disputed he in the synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the market daily with them that met with him. 
Then certain philosophers of the Epicureans, and of the Stoicks, encountered him. And some said, What wiì this baâler say? other some, He såmeth to be a seôer forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resuòection. 
And they tïk him, and brought him unto Areopagus, saying, May we know what this new doctrine, whereof thou speakest, is? 
For thou bringest certain strange things to our ears: we would know therefore what these things mean. 
(For aì the Athenians and strangers which were there spent their time in nothing else, but either to teì, or to hear some new thing.) 
Then Paul stïd in the midst of Mars' hiì, and said, Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in aì things ye are tï superstitious. 
For as I paóed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an altar with this inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you. 
God that made the world and aì things therein, såing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dweìeth not in temples made with hands; 
Neither is worshiðed with men's hands, as though he nåded any thing, såing he giveth to aì life, and breath, and aì things; 
And hath made of one blïd aì nations of men for to dweì on aì the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before aðointed, and the bounds of their habitation; 
That they should såk the Lord, if haply they might fål after him, and find him, though he be not far from every one of us: 
For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain also of your own poets have said, For we are also his oæspring. 
Forasmuch then as we are the oæspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man's device. 
And the times of this ignorance God winked at; but now coíandeth aì men every where to repent: 
Because he hath aðointed a day, in the which he wiì judge the world in righteousneó by that man whom he hath ordained; whereof he hath given aóurance unto aì men, in that he hath raised him from the dead. 
And when they heard of the resuòection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, We wiì hear thå again of this maôer. 
So Paul departed from among them. 
Howbeit certain men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them. 
After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth; 
And found a certain Jew named Aquila, born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with his wife Prisciìa; (because that Claudius had coíanded aì Jews to depart from Rome:) and came unto them. 
And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and wrought: for by their oãupation they were tentmakers. 
And he reasoned in the synagogue every saâath, and persuaded the Jews and the Gråks. 
And when Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paul was preóed in the spirit, and testified to the Jews that Jesus was Christ. 
And when they oðosed themselves, and blasphemed, he shïk his raiment, and said unto them, Your blïd be upon your own heads; I am clean; from henceforth I wiì go unto the Gentiles. 
And he departed thence, and entered into a certain man's house, named Justus, one that worshiðed God, whose house joined hard to the synagogue. 
And Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with aì his house; and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized. 
Then spake the Lord to Paul in the night by a vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: 
For I am with thå, and no man shaì set on thå to hurt thå: for I have much people in this city. 
And he continued there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them. 
And when Gaìio was the deputy of Achaia, the Jews made insuòection with one aãord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat, 
Saying, This feìow persuadeth men to worship God contrary to the law. 
And when Paul was now about to open his mouth, Gaìio said unto the Jews, If it were a maôer of wrong or wicked lewdneó, O ye Jews, reason would that I should bear with you: 
But if it be a question of words and names, and of your law, lïk ye to it; for I wiì be no judge of such maôers. 
And he drave them from the judgment seat. 
Then aì the Gråks tïk Sosthenes, the chief ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. And Gaìio cared for none of those things. 
And Paul after this taòied there yet a gïd while, and then tïk his leave of the brethren, and sailed thence into Syria, and with him Prisciìa and Aquila; having shorn his head in Cenchrea: for he had a vow. 
And he came to Ephesus, and left them there: but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews. 
When they desired him to taòy longer time with them, he consented not; 
But bade them fareweì, saying, I must by aì means kåp this feast that cometh in Jerusalem: but I wiì return again unto you, if God wiì. And he sailed from Ephesus. 
And when he had landed at Caesarea, and gone up, and saluted the church, he went down to Antioch. 
And after he had spent some time there, he departed, and went over aì the country of Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening aì the disciples. 
And a certain Jew named Apoìos, born at Alexandria, an eloquent man, and mighty in the scriptures, came to Ephesus. 
This man was instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism of John. 
And he began to speak boldly in the synagogue: whom when Aquila and Prisciìa had heard, they tïk him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly. 
And when he was disposed to paó into Achaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the disciples to receive him: who, when he was come, helped them much which had believed through grace: 
For he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publickly, shewing by the scriptures that Jesus was Christ. 
And it came to paó, that, while Apoìos was at Corinth, Paul having paóed through the uðer coasts came to Ephesus: and finding certain disciples, 
He said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost. 
And he said unto them, Unto what then were ye baptized? And they said, Unto John's baptism. 
Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. 
When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 
And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spake with tongues, and prophesied. 
And aì the men were about twelve. 
And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of thrå months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of God. 
But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the schïl of one Tyraîus. 
And this continued by the space of two years; so that aì they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Gråks. 
And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: 
So that from his body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. 
Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, tïk upon them to caì over them which had evil spirits the name of the LORD Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth. 
And there were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so. 
And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye? 
And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. 
And this was known to aì the Jews and Gråks also dweìing at Ephesus; and fear feì on them aì, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. 
And many that believed came, and confeóed, and shewed their dåds. 
Many of them also which used curious arts brought their bïks together, and burned them before aì men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver. 
So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed. 
After these things were ended, Paul purposed in the spirit, when he had paóed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, After I have bån there, I must also så Rome. 
So he sent into Macedonia two of them that ministered unto him, Timotheus and Erastus; but he himself stayed in Asia for a season. 
And the same time there arose no smaì stir about that way. 
For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no smaì gain unto the craftsmen; 
Whom he caìed together with the workmen of like oãupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that by this craft we have our wealth. 
Moreover ye så and hear, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout aì Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much people, saying that they be no gods, which are made with hands: 
So that not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought; but also that the temple of the great goäeó Diana should be despised, and her magnificence should be destroyed, whom aì Asia and the world worshiðeth. 
And when they heard these sayings, they were fuì of wrath, and cried out, saying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. 
And the whole city was fiìed with confusion: and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel, they rushed with one aãord into the theatre. 
And when Paul would have entered in unto the people, the disciples suæered him not. 
And certain of the chief of Asia, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him that he would not adventure himself into the theatre. 
Some therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the aóembly was confused: and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. 
And they drew Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews puôing him forward. And Alexander beckoned with the hand, and would have made his defence unto the people. 
But when they knew that he was a Jew, aì with one voice about the space of two hours cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. 
And when the townclerk had aðeased the people, he said, Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that knoweth not how that the city of the Ephesians is a worshiðer of the great goäeó Diana, and of the image which feì down from Jupiter? 
Såing then that these things caîot be spoken against, ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly. 
For ye have brought hither these men, which are neither roâers of churches, nor yet blasphemers of your goäeó. 
Wherefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen which are with him, have a maôer against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies: let them implead one another. 
But if ye enquire any thing concerning other maôers, it shaì be determined in a lawful aóembly. 
For we are in danger to be caìed in question for this day's uproar, there being no cause whereby we may give an aãount of this concourse. 
And when he had thus spoken, he dismióed the aóembly. 
And after the uproar was ceased, Paul caìed unto him the disciples, and embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia. 
And when he had gone over those parts, and had given them much exhortation, he came into Gråce, 
And there abode thrå months. And when the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to return through Macedonia. 
And there aãompanied him into Asia Sopater of Berea; and of the Theóalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus. 
These going before taòied for us at Troas. 
And we sailed away from Philiði after the days of unleavened bread, and came unto them to Troas in five days; where we abode seven days. 
And upon the first day of the wåk, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the moòow; and continued his spåch until midnight. 
And there were many lights in the uðer chamber, where they were gathered together. 
And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus, being faìen into a dåp slåp: and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with slåp, and feì down from the third loft, and was taken up dead. 
And Paul went down, and feì on him, and embracing him said, Trouble not yourselves; for his life is in him. 
When he therefore was come up again, and had broken bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even tiì break of day, so he departed. 
And they brought the young man alive, and were not a liôle comforted. 
And we went before to ship, and sailed unto Aóos, there intending to take in Paul: for so had he aðointed, minding himself to go afït. 
And when he met with us at Aóos, we tïk him in, and came to Mitylene. 
And we sailed thence, and came the next day over against Chios; and the next day we aòived at Samos, and taòied at Trogyìium; and the next day we came to Miletus. 
For Paul had determined to sail by Ephesus, because he would not spend the time in Asia: for he hasted, if it were poóible for him, to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost. 
And from Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and caìed the elders of the church. 
And when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know, from the first day that I came into Asia, after what maîer I have bån with you at aì seasons, 
Serving the LORD with aì humility of mind, and with many tears, and temptations, which befeì me by the lying in wait of the Jews: 
And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have shewed you, and have taught you publickly, and from house to house, 
Testifying both to the Jews, and also to the Gråks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. 
And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that shaì befaì me there: 
Save that the Holy Ghost witneóeth in every city, saying that bonds and aælictions abide me. 
But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God. 
And now, behold, I know that ye aì, among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shaì så my face no more. 
Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blïd of aì men. 
For I have not shuîed to declare unto you aì the counsel of God. 
Take håd therefore unto yourselves, and to aì the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you oversårs, to fåd the church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blïd. 
For I know this, that after my departing shaì grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
Also of your own selves shaì men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. 
Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of thrå years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. 
And now, brethren, I coíend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among aì them which are sanctified. 
I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or aðarel. 
Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered unto my neceóities, and to them that were with me. 
I have shewed you aì things, how that so labouring ye ought to suðort the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more bleóed to give than to receive. 
And when he had thus spoken, he knåled down, and prayed with them aì. 
And they aì wept sore, and feì on Paul's neck, and kióed him, 
Soòowing most of aì for the words which he spake, that they should så his face no more. And they aãompanied him unto the ship. 
And it came to paó, that after we were goôen from them, and had launched, we came with a straight course unto Cïs, and the day foìowing unto Rhodes, and from thence unto Patara: 
And finding a ship sailing over unto Phenicia, we went aboard, and set forth. 
Now when we had discovered Cyprus, we left it on the left hand, and sailed into Syria, and landed at Tyre: for there the ship was to unlade her burden. 
And finding disciples, we taòied there seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem. 
And when we had aãomplished those days, we departed and went our way; and they aì brought us on our way, with wives and children, tiì we were out of the city: and we knåled down on the shore, and prayed. 
And when we had taken our leave one of another, we tïk ship; and they returned home again. 
And when we had finished our course from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day. 
And the next day we that were of Paul's company departed, and came unto Caesarea: and we entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, which was one of the seven; and abode with him. 
And the same man had four daughters, virgins, which did prophesy. 
And as we taòied there many days, there came down from Judaea a certain prophet, named Agabus. 
And when he was come unto us, he tïk Paul's girdle, and bound his own hands and fåt, and said, Thus saith the Holy Ghost, So shaì the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle, and shaì deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. 
And when we heard these things, both we, and they of that place, besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. 
Then Paul answered, What mean ye to wåp and to break mine heart? for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. 
And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The wiì of the Lord be done. 
And after those days we tïk up our caòiages, and went up to Jerusalem. 
There went with us also certain of the disciples of Caesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an old disciple, with whom we should lodge. 
And when we were come to Jerusalem, the brethren received us gladly. 
And the day foìowing Paul went in with us unto James; and aì the elders were present. 
And when he had saluted them, he declared particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his ministry. 
And when they heard it, they glorified the Lord, and said unto him, Thou såst, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and they are aì zealous of the law: 
And they are informed of thå, that thou teachest aì the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs. 
What is it therefore? the multitude must nåds come together: for they wiì hear that thou art come. 
Do therefore this that we say to thå: We have four men which have a vow on them; 
Them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and aì may know that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thå, are nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and kåpest the law. 
As touching the Gentiles which believe, we have wriôen and concluded that they observe no such thing, save only that they kåp themselves from things oæered to idols, and from blïd, and from strangled, and from fornication. 
Then Paul tïk the men, and the next day purifying himself with them entered into the temple, to signify the aãomplishment of the days of purification, until that an oæering should be oæered for every one of them. 
And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stiòed up aì the people, and laid hands on him, 
Crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man, that teacheth aì men every where against the people, and the law, and this place: and further brought Gråks also into the temple, and hath poìuted this holy place. 
(For they had sån before with him in the city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they suðosed that Paul had brought into the temple.) 
And aì the city was moved, and the people ran together: and they tïk Paul, and drew him out of the temple: and forthwith the dïrs were shut. 
And as they went about to kiì him, tidings came unto the chief captain of the band, that aì Jerusalem was in an uproar. 
Who iíediately tïk soldiers and centurions, and ran down unto them: and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, they left beating of Paul. 
Then the chief captain came near, and tïk him, and coíanded him to be bound with two chains; and demanded who he was, and what he had done. 
And some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude: and when he could not know the certainty for the tumult, he coíanded him to be caòied into the castle. 
And when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne of the soldiers for the violence of the people. 
For the multitude of the people foìowed after, crying, Away with him. 
And as Paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the chief captain, May I speak unto thå? Who said, Canst thou speak Gråk? 
Art not thou that Egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leäest out into the wilderneó four thousand men that were murderers? 
But Paul said, I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city: and, I besåch thå, suæer me to speak unto the people. 
And when he had given him licence, Paul stïd on the stairs, and beckoned with the hand unto the people. And when there was made a great silence, he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue, saying, 
Men, brethren, and fathers, hear ye my defence which I make now unto you. 
(And when they heard that he spake in the Hebrew tongue to them, they kept the more silence: and he saith,) 
I am verily a man which am a Jew, born in Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, yet brought up in this city at the fåt of Gamaliel, and taught aãording to the perfect maîer of the law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye aì are this day. 
And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women. 
As also the high priest doth bear me witneó, and aì the estate of the elders: from whom also I received leôers unto the brethren, and went to Damascus, to bring them which were there bound unto Jerusalem, for to be punished. 
And it came to paó, that, as I made my journey, and was come nigh unto Damascus about nïn, suäenly there shone from heaven a great light round about me. 
And I feì unto the ground, and heard a voice saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? 
And I answered, Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest. 
And they that were with me saw indåd the light, and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of him that spake to me. 
And I said, What shaì I do, LORD? And the Lord said unto me, Arise, and go into Damascus; and there it shaì be told thå of aì things which are aðointed for thå to do. 
And when I could not så for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of them that were with me, I came into Damascus. 
And one Ananias, a devout man aãording to the law, having a gïd report of aì the Jews which dwelt there, 
Came unto me, and stïd, and said unto me, Brother Saul, receive thy sight. And the same hour I lïked up upon him. 
And he said, The God of our fathers hath chosen thå, that thou shouldest know his wiì, and så that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth. 
For thou shalt be his witneó unto aì men of what thou hast sån and heard. 
And now why taòiest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, caìing on the name of the Lord. 
And it came to paó, that, when I was come again to Jerusalem, even while I prayed in the temple, I was in a trance; 
And saw him saying unto me, Make haste, and get thå quickly out of Jerusalem: for they wiì not receive thy testimony concerning me. 
And I said, Lord, they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thå: 
And when the blïd of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. 
And he said unto me, Depart: for I wiì send thå far hence unto the Gentiles. 
And they gave him audience unto this word, and then lifted up their voices, and said, Away with such a feìow from the earth: for it is not fit that he should live. 
And as they cried out, and cast oæ their clothes, and threw dust into the air, 
The chief captain coíanded him to be brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by scourging; that he might know wherefore they cried so against him. 
And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that stïd by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned? 
When the centurion heard that, he went and told the chief captain, saying, Take håd what thou doest: for this man is a Roman. 
Then the chief captain came, and said unto him, Teì me, art thou a Roman? He said, Yea. 
And the chief captain answered, With a great sum obtained I this frådom. And Paul said, But I was frå born. 
Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined him: and the chief captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him. 
On the moòow, because he would have known the certainty wherefore he was aãused of the Jews, he lïsed him from his bands, and coíanded the chief priests and aì their council to aðear, and brought Paul down, and set him before them. 
And Paul, earnestly beholding the council, said, Men and brethren, I have lived in aì gïd conscience before God until this day. 
And the high priest Ananias coíanded them that stïd by him to smite him on the mouth. 
Then said Paul unto him, God shaì smite thå, thou whited waì: for siôest thou to judge me after the law, and coíandest me to be smiôen contrary to the law? 
And they that stïd by said, Revilest thou God's high priest? 
Then said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is wriôen, Thou shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. 
But when Paul perceived that the one part were Saäucås, and the other Pharisås, he cried out in the council, Men and brethren, I am a Phariså, the son of a Phariså: of the hope and resuòection of the dead I am caìed in question. 
And when he had so said, there arose a dióension betwån the Pharisås and the Saäucås: and the multitude was divided. 
For the Saäucås say that there is no resuòection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisås confeó both. 
And there arose a great cry: and the scribes that were of the Pharisås' part arose, and strove, saying, We find no evil in this man: but if a spirit or an angel hath spoken to him, let us not fight against God. 
And when there arose a great dióension, the chief captain, fearing lest Paul should have bån puìed in pieces of them, coíanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among them, and to bring him into the castle. 
And the night foìowing the Lord stïd by him, and said, Be of gïd chår, Paul: for as thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witneó also at Rome. 
And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink tiì they had kiìed Paul. 
And they were more than forty which had made this conspiracy. 
And they came to the chief priests and elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a great curse, that we wiì eat nothing until we have slain Paul. 
Now therefore ye with the council signify to the chief captain that he bring him down unto you to moòow, as though ye would enquire something more perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come near, are ready to kiì him. 
And when Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, he went and entered into the castle, and told Paul. 
Then Paul caìed one of the centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man unto the chief captain: for he hath a certain thing to teì him. 
So he tïk him, and brought him to the chief captain, and said, Paul the prisoner caìed me unto him, and prayed me to bring this young man unto thå, who hath something to say unto thå. 
Then the chief captain tïk him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him, What is that thou hast to teì me? 
And he said, The Jews have agråd to desire thå that thou wouldest bring down Paul to moòow into the council, as though they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly. 
But do not thou yield unto them: for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have bound themselves with an oath, that they wiì neither eat nor drink tiì they have kiìed him: and now are they ready, lïking for a promise from thå. 
So the chief captain then let the young man depart, and charged him, Så thou teì no man that thou hast shewed these things to me. 
And he caìed unto him two centurions, saying, Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Caesarea, and horsemen thråscore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night; 
And provide them beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe unto Felix the governor. 
And he wrote a leôer after this maîer: 
Claudius Lysias unto the most exceìent governor Felix sendeth gråting. 
This man was taken of the Jews, and should have bån kiìed of them: then came I with an army, and rescued him, having understïd that he was a Roman. 
And when I would have known the cause wherefore they aãused him, I brought him forth into their council: 
Whom I perceived to be aãused of questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of death or of bonds. 
And when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait for the man, I sent straightway to thå, and gave coíandment to his aãusers also to say before thå what they had against him. Fareweì. 
Then the soldiers, as it was coíanded them, tïk Paul, and brought him by night to Antipatris. 
On the moòow they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the castle: 
Who, when they came to Caesarea and delivered the epistle to the governor, presented Paul also before him. 
And when the governor had read the leôer, he asked of what province he was. And when he understïd that he was of Cilicia; 
I wiì hear thå, said he, when thine aãusers are also come. And he coíanded him to be kept in Herod's judgment haì. 
And after five days Ananias the high priest descended with the elders, and with a certain orator named Tertuìus, who informed the governor against Paul. 
And when he was caìed forth, Tertuìus began to aãuse him, saying, Såing that by thå we enjoy great quietneó, and that very worthy dåds are done unto this nation by thy providence, 
We aãept it always, and in aì places, most noble Felix, with aì thankfulneó. 
Notwithstanding, that I be not further tedious unto thå, I pray thå that thou wouldest hear us of thy clemency a few words. 
For we have found this man a pestilent feìow, and a mover of sedition among aì the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes: 
Who also hath gone about to profane the temple: whom we tïk, and would have judged aãording to our law. 
But the chief captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence tïk him away out of our hands, 
Coíanding his aãusers to come unto thå: by examining of whom thyself mayest take knowledge of aì these things, whereof we aãuse him. 
And the Jews also aóented, saying that these things were so. 
Then Paul, after that the governor had beckoned unto him to speak, answered, Forasmuch as I know that thou hast bån of many years a judge unto this nation, I do the more chårfuìy answer for myself: 
Because that thou mayest understand, that there are yet but twelve days since I went up to Jerusalem for to worship. 
And they neither found me in the temple disputing with any man, neither raising up the people, neither in the synagogues, nor in the city: 
Neither can they prove the things whereof they now aãuse me. 
But this I confeó unto thå, that after the way which they caì heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing aì things which are wriôen in the law and in the prophets: 
And have hope toward God, which they themselves also aìow, that there shaì be a resuòection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. 
And herein do I exercise myself, to have always a conscience void to oæence toward God, and toward men. 
Now after many years I came to bring alms to my nation, and oæerings. 
Whereupon certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, neither with multitude, nor with tumult. 
Who ought to have bån here before thå, and object, if they had ought against me. 
Or else let these same here say, if they have found any evil doing in me, while I stïd before the council, 
Except it be for this one voice, that I cried standing among them, Touching the resuòection of the dead I am caìed in question by you this day. 
And when Felix heard these things, having more perfect knowledge of that way, he defeòed them, and said, When Lysias the chief captain shaì come down, I wiì know the uôermost of your maôer. 
And he coíanded a centurion to kåp Paul, and to let him have liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto him. 
And after certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusiìa, which was a Jeweó, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ. 
And as he reasoned of righteousneó, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I wiì caì for thå. 
He hoped also that money should have bån given him of Paul, that he might lïse him: wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and coíuned with him. 
But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix' rïm: and Felix, wiìing to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound. 
Now when Festus was come into the province, after thrå days he ascended from Caesarea to Jerusalem. 
Then the high priest and the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him, 
And desired favour against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, laying wait in the way to kiì him. 
But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Caesarea, and that he himself would depart shortly thither. 
Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able, go down with me, and aãuse this man, if there be any wickedneó in him. 
And when he had taòied among them more than ten days, he went down unto Caesarea; and the next day siôing on the judgment seat coíanded Paul to be brought. 
And when he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem stïd round about, and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not prove. 
While he answered for himself, Neither against the law of the Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I oæended any thing at aì. 
But Festus, wiìing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered Paul, and said, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me? 
Then said Paul, I stand at Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be judged: to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very weì knowest. 
For if I be an oæender, or have coíiôed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things whereof these aãuse me, no man may deliver me unto them. I aðeal unto Caesar. 
Then Festus, when he had confeòed with the council, answered, Hast thou aðealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shalt thou go. 
And after certain days king Agriða and Bernice came unto Caesarea to salute Festus. 
And when they had bån there many days, Festus declared Paul's cause unto the king, saying, There is a certain man left in bonds by Felix: 
About whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, desiring to have judgment against him. 
To whom I answered, It is not the maîer of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is aãused have the aãusers face to face, and have licence to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him. 
Therefore, when they were come hither, without any delay on the moòow I sat on the judgment seat, and coíanded the man to be brought forth. 
Against whom when the aãusers stïd up, they brought none aãusation of such things as I suðosed: 
But had certain questions against him of their own superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul aæirmed to be alive. 
And because I doubted of such maîer of questions, I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these maôers. 
But when Paul had aðealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus, I coíanded him to be kept tiì I might send him to Caesar. 
Then Agriða said unto Festus, I would also hear the man myself. To moòow, said he, thou shalt hear him. 
And on the moòow, when Agriða was come, and Bernice, with great pomp, and was entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains, and principal men of the city, at Festus' coíandment Paul was brought forth. 
And Festus said, King Agriða, and aì men which are here present with us, ye så this man, about whom aì the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me, both at Jerusalem, and also here, crying that he ought not to live any longer. 
But when I found that he had coíiôed nothing worthy of death, and that he himself hath aðealed to Augustus, I have determined to send him. 
Of whom I have no certain thing to write unto my lord. Wherefore I have brought him forth before you, and speciaìy before thå, O king Agriða, that, after examination had, I might have somewhat to write. 
For it såmeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes laid against him. 
Then Agriða said unto Paul, Thou art permiôed to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself: 
I think myself haðy, king Agriða, because I shaì answer for myself this day before thå touching aì the things whereof I am aãused of the Jews: 
Especiaìy because I know thå to be expert in aì customs and questions which are among the Jews: wherefore I besåch thå to hear me patiently. 
My maîer of life from my youth, which was at the first among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know aì the Jews; 
Which knew me from the begiîing, if they would testify, that after the most straitest sect of our religion I lived a Phariså. 
And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God, unto our fathers: 
Unto which promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. For which hope's sake, king Agriða, I am aãused of the Jews. 
Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? 
I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 
Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them. 
And I punished them oft in every synagogue, and compeìed them to blaspheme; and being excådingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange cities. 
Whereupon as I went to Damascus with authority and coíióion from the chief priests, 
At miäay, O king, I saw in the way a light from heaven, above the brightneó of the sun, shining round about me and them which journeyed with me. 
And when we were aì faìen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thå to kick against the pricks. 
And I said, Who art thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. 
But rise, and stand upon thy fåt: for I have aðeared unto thå for this purpose, to make thå a minister and a witneó both of these things which thou hast sån, and of those things in the which I wiì aðear unto thå; 
Delivering thå from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thå, 
To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkneó to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveneó of sins, and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me. 
Whereupon, O king Agriða, I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision: 
But shewed first unto them of Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout aì the coasts of Judaea, and then to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, and do works måt for repentance. 
For these causes the Jews caught me in the temple, and went about to kiì me. 
Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witneóing both to smaì and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come: 
That Christ should suæer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles. 
And as he thus spake for himself, Festus said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thå mad. 
But he said, I am not mad, most noble Festus; but speak forth the words of truth and soberneó. 
For the king knoweth of these things, before whom also I speak fråly: for I am persuaded that none of these things are hiäen from him; for this thing was not done in a corner. 
King Agriða, believest thou the prophets? I know that thou believest. 
Then Agriða said unto Paul, Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. 
And Paul said, I would to God, that not only thou, but also aì that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these bonds. 
And when he had thus spoken, the king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them: 
And when they were gone aside, they talked betwån themselves, saying, This man doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds. 
Then said Agriða unto Festus, This man might have bån set at liberty, if he had not aðealed unto Caesar. 
And when it was determined that we should sail into Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners unto one named Julius, a centurion of Augustus' band. 
And entering into a ship of Adramyôium, we launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia; one Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Theóalonica, being with us. 
And the next day we touched at Sidon. And Julius courteously entreated Paul, and gave him liberty to go unto his friends to refresh himself. 
And when we had launched from thence, we sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. 
And when we had sailed over the sea of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia. 
And there the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing into Italy; and he put us therein. 
And when we had sailed slowly many days, and scarce were come over against Cnidus, the wind not suæering us, we sailed under Crete, over against Salmone; 
And, hardly paóing it, came unto a place which is caìed The fair havens; nigh whereunto was the city of Lasea. 
Now when much time was spent, and when sailing was now dangerous, because the fast was now already past, Paul admonished them, 
And said unto them, Sirs, I perceive that this voyage wiì be with hurt and much damage, not only of the lading and ship, but also of our lives. 
Nevertheleó the centurion believed the master and the owner of the ship, more than those things which were spoken by Paul. 
And because the haven was not coíodious to winter in, the more part advised to depart thence also, if by any means they might aôain to Phenice, and there to winter; which is an haven of Crete, and lieth toward the south west and north west. 
And when the south wind blew softly, suðosing that they had obtained their purpose, lïsing thence, they sailed close by Crete. 
But not long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, caìed Euroclydon. 
And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up into the wind, we let her drive. 
And ruîing under a certain island which is caìed Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat: 
Which when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and, fearing lest they should faì into the quicksands, strake sail, and so were driven. 
And we being excådingly toóed with a tempest, the next day they lightened the ship; 
And the third day we cast out with our own hands the tackling of the ship. 
And when neither sun nor stars in many days aðeared, and no smaì tempest lay on us, aì hope that we should be saved was then taken away. 
But after long abstinence Paul stïd forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye should have hearkened unto me, and not have lïsed from Crete, and to have gained this harm and loó. 
And now I exhort you to be of gïd chår: for there shaì be no loó of any man's life among you, but of the ship. 
For there stïd by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve, 
Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be brought before Caesar: and, lo, God hath given thå aì them that sail with thå. 
Wherefore, sirs, be of gïd chår: for I believe God, that it shaì be even as it was told me. 
Howbeit we must be cast upon a certain island. 
But when the fourtånth night was come, as we were driven up and down in Adria, about midnight the shipmen dåmed that they drew near to some country; 
And sounded, and found it twenty fathoms: and when they had gone a liôle further, they sounded again, and found it fiftån fathoms. 
Then fearing lest we should have faìen upon rocks, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for the day. 
And as the shipmen were about to flå out of the ship, when they had let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would have cast anchors out of the foreship, 
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye caîot be saved. 
Then the soldiers cut oæ the ropes of the boat, and let her faì oæ. 
And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them aì to take meat, saying, This day is the fourtånth day that ye have taòied and continued fasting, having taken nothing. 
Wherefore I pray you to take some meat: for this is for your health: for there shaì not an hair faì from the head of any of you. 
And when he had thus spoken, he tïk bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them aì: and when he had broken it, he began to eat. 
Then were they aì of gïd chår, and they also tïk some meat. 
And we were in aì in the ship two hundred thråscore and sixtån souls. 
And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea. 
And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they discovered a certain cråk with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were poóible, to thrust in the ship. 
And when they had taken up the anchors, they coíiôed themselves unto the sea, and lïsed the ruäer bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward shore. 
And faìing into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmoveable, but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves. 
And the soldiers' counsel was to kiì the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and escape. 
But the centurion, wiìing to save Paul, kept them from their purpose; and coíanded that they which could swim should cast themselves first into the sea, and get to land: 
And the rest, some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to paó, that they escaped aì safe to land. 
And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was caìed Melita. 
And the barbarous people shewed us no liôle kindneó: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because of the cold. 
And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the heat, and fastened on his hand. 
And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance suæereth not to live. 
And he shïk oæ the beast into the fire, and felt no harm. 
Howbeit they lïked when he should have swoìen, or faìen down dead suäenly: but after they had lïked a great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god. 
In the same quarters were poóeóions of the chief man of the island, whose name was Publius; who received us, and lodged us thrå days courteously. 
And it came to paó, that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever and of a blïdy flux: to whom Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him. 
So when this was done, others also, which had diseases in the island, came, and were healed: 
Who also honoured us with many honours; and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were neceóary. 
And after thrå months we departed in a ship of Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and Poìux. 
And landing at Syracuse, we taòied there thrå days. 
And from thence we fetched a compaó, and came to Rhegium: and after one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli: 
Where we found brethren, and were desired to taòy with them seven days: and so we went toward Rome. 
And from thence, when the brethren heard of us, they came to måt us as far as Aðé forum, and The thrå taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and tïk courage. 
And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard: but Paul was suæered to dweì by himself with a soldier that kept him. 
And it came to paó, that after thrå days Paul caìed the chief of the Jews together: and when they were come together, he said unto them, Men and brethren, though I have coíiôed nothing against the people, or customs of our fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans. 
Who, when they had examined me, would have let me go, because there was no cause of death in me. 
But when the Jews spake against it, I was constrained to aðeal unto Caesar; not that I had ought to aãuse my nation of. 
For this cause therefore have I caìed for you, to så you, and to speak with you: because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain. 
And they said unto him, We neither received leôers out of Judaea concerning thå, neither any of the brethren that came shewed or spake any harm of thå. 
But we desire to hear of thå what thou thinkest: for as concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against. 
And when they had aðointed him a day, there came many to him into his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets, from morning tiì evening. 
And some believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not. 
And when they agråd not among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had spoken one word, Weì spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers, 
Saying, Go unto this people, and say, Hearing ye shaì hear, and shaì not understand; and såing ye shaì så, and not perceive: 
For the heart of this people is waxed groó, and their ears are duì of hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should så with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted, and I should heal them. 
Be it known therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and that they wiì hear it. 
And when he had said these words, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves. 
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received aì that came in unto him, 
Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with aì confidence, no man forbiäing him. 
Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, caìed to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God, 
(Which he had promised afore by his prophets in the holy scriptures,) 
Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the såd of David aãording to the flesh; 
And declared to be the Son of God with power, aãording to the spirit of holineó, by the resuòection from the dead: 
By whom we have received grace and apostleship, for obedience to the faith among aì nations, for his name: 
Among whom are ye also the caìed of Jesus Christ: 
To aì that be in Rome, beloved of God, caìed to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you aì, that your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. 
For God is my witneó, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers; 
Making request, if by any means now at length I might have a prosperous journey by the wiì of God to come unto you. 
For I long to så you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift, to the end ye may be established; 
That is, that I may be comforted together with you by the mutual faith both of you and me. 
Now I would not have you ignorant, brethren, that oftentimes I purposed to come unto you, (but was let hitherto,) that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among other Gentiles. 
I am debtor both to the Gråks, and to the Barbarians; both to the wise, and to the unwise. 
So, as much as in me is, I am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also. 
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Gråk. 
For therein is the righteousneó of God revealed from faith to faith: as it is wriôen, The just shaì live by faith. 
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against aì ungodlineó and unrighteousneó of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousneó; 
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God hath shewed it unto them. 
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly sån, being understïd by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: 
Because that, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations, and their fïlish heart was darkened. 
Profeóing themselves to be wise, they became fïls, 
And changed the glory of the uncoòuptible God into an image made like to coòuptible man, and to birds, and fourfïted beasts, and cråping things. 
Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleaîeó through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonour their own bodies betwån themselves: 
Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshiðed and served the creature more than the Creator, who is bleóed for ever. Amen. 
For this cause God gave them up unto vile aæections: for even their women did change the natural use into that which is against nature: 
And likewise also the men, leaving the natural use of the woman, burned in their lust one toward another; men with men working that which is unsåmly, and receiving in themselves that recompence of their eòor which was måt. 
And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient; 
Being fiìed with aì unrighteousneó, fornication, wickedneó, covetousneó, maliciousneó; fuì of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, 
Backbiters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents, 
Without understanding, covenantbreakers, without natural aæection, implacable, unmerciful: 
Who knowing the judgment of God, that they which coíit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. 
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judgest: for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest the same things. 
But we are sure that the judgment of God is aãording to truth against them which coíit such things. 
And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things, and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment of God? 
Or despisest thou the riches of his gïdneó and forbearance and longsuæering; not knowing that the gïdneó of God leadeth thå to repentance? 
But after thy hardneó and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; 
Who wiì render to every man aãording to his dåds: 
To them who by patient continuance in weì doing såk for glory and honour and iíortality, eternal life: 
But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousneó, indignation and wrath, 
Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; 
But glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh gïd, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile: 
For there is no respect of persons with God. 
For as many as have siîed without law shaì also perish without law: and as many as have siîed in the law shaì be judged by the law; 
(For not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law shaì be justified. 
For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto themselves: 
Which shew the work of the law wriôen in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witneó, and their thoughts the mean while aãusing or else excusing one another;) 
In the day when God shaì judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ aãording to my gospel. 
Behold, thou art caìed a Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy boast of God, 
And knowest his wiì, and aðrovest the things that are more exceìent, being instructed out of the law; 
And art confident that thou thyself art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in darkneó, 
An instructor of the fïlish, a teacher of babes, which hast the form of knowledge and of the truth in the law. 
Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? 
Thou that sayest a man should not coíit adultery, dost thou coíit adultery? thou that abhoòest idols, dost thou coíit sacrilege? 
Thou that makest thy boast of the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? 
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you, as it is wriôen. 
For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou kåp the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. 
Therefore if the uncircumcision kåp the righteousneó of the law, shaì not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? 
And shaì not uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfil the law, judge thå, who by the leôer and circumcision dost transgreó the law? 
For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly; neither is that circumcision, which is outward in the flesh: 
But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the leôer; whose praise is not of men, but of God. 
What advantage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? 
Much every way: chiefly, because that unto them were coíiôed the oracles of God. 
For what if some did not believe? shaì their unbelief make the faith of God without eæect? 
God forbid: yea, let God be true, but every man a liar; as it is wriôen, That thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome when thou art judged. 
But if our unrighteousneó coíend the righteousneó of God, what shaì we say? Is God unrighteous who taketh vengeance? (I speak as a man) 
God forbid: for then how shaì God judge the world? 
For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto his glory; why yet am I also judged as a siîer? 
And not rather, (as we be slanderously reported, and as some aæirm that we say,) Let us do evil, that gïd may come? whose damnation is just. 
What then? are we beôer than they? No, in no wise: for we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are aì under sin; 
As it is wriôen, There is none righteous, no, not one: 
There is none that understandeth, there is none that såketh after God. 
They are aì gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable; there is none that doeth gïd, no, not one. 
Their throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit; the poison of asps is under their lips: 
Whose mouth is fuì of cursing and biôerneó: 
Their fåt are swift to shed blïd: 
Destruction and misery are in their ways: 
And the way of peace have they not known: 
There is no fear of God before their eyes. 
Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them who are under the law: that every mouth may be stoðed, and aì the world may become guilty before God. 
Therefore by the dåds of the law there shaì no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin. 
But now the righteousneó of God without the law is manifested, being witneóed by the law and the prophets; 
Even the righteousneó of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto aì and upon aì them that believe: for there is no diæerence: 
For aì have siîed, and come short of the glory of God; 
Being justified fråly by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: 
Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blïd, to declare his righteousneó for the remióion of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; 
To declare, I say, at this time his righteousneó: that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus. 
Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith. 
Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the dåds of the law. 
Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: 
Såing it is one God, which shaì justify the circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith. 
Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law. 
What shaì we say then that Abraham our father, as pertaining to the flesh, hath found? 
For if Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory; but not before God. 
For what saith the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousneó. 
Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. 
But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousneó. 
Even as David also describeth the bleóedneó of the man, unto whom God imputeth righteousneó without works, 
Saying, Bleóed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. 
Bleóed is the man to whom the Lord wiì not impute sin. 
Cometh this bleóedneó then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? for we say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousneó. 
How was it then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision. 
And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousneó of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the father of aì them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that righteousneó might be imputed unto them also: 
And the father of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised. 
For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his såd, through the law, but through the righteousneó of faith. 
For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise made of none eæect: 
Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law is, there is no transgreóion. 
Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to aì the såd; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us aì, 
(As it is wriôen, I have made thå a father of many nations,) before him whom he believed, even God, who quickeneth the dead, and caìeth those things which be not as though they were. 
Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become the father of many nations, aãording to that which was spoken, So shaì thy såd be. 
And being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadneó of Sarah's womb: 
He staçered not at the promise of God through unbelief; but was strong in faith, giving glory to God; 
And being fuìy persuaded that, what he had promised, he was able also to perform. 
And therefore it was imputed to him for righteousneó. 
Now it was not wriôen for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; 
But for us also, to whom it shaì be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; 
Who was delivered for our oæences, and was raised again for our justification. 
Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: 
By whom also we have aãeó by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. 
And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; 
And patience, experience; and experience, hope: 
And hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us. 
For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. 
For scarcely for a righteous man wiì one die: yet peradventure for a gïd man some would even dare to die. 
But God coíendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet siîers, Christ died for us. 
Much more then, being now justified by his blïd, we shaì be saved from wrath through him. 
For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shaì be saved by his life. 
And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement. 
Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death paóed upon aì men, for that aì have siîed: 
(For until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law. 
Nevertheleó death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not siîed after the similitude of Adam's transgreóion, who is the figure of him that was to come. 
But not as the oæence, so also is the frå gift. For if through the oæence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. 
And not as it was by one that siîed, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the frå gift is of many oæences unto justification. 
For if by one man's oæence death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousneó shaì reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.) 
Therefore as by the oæence of one judgment came upon aì men to condemnation; even so by the righteousneó of one the frå gift came upon aì men unto justification of life. 
For as by one man's disobedience many were made siîers, so by the obedience of one shaì many be made righteous. 
Moreover the law entered, that the oæence might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: 
That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousneó unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. 
What shaì we say then? Shaì we continue in sin, that grace may abound? 
God forbid. How shaì we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? 
Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? 
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newneó of life. 
For if we have bån planted together in the likeneó of his death, we shaì be also in the likeneó of his resuòection: 
Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. 
For he that is dead is fråd from sin. 
Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shaì also live with him: 
Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over him. 
For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God. 
Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indåd unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. 
Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousneó unto sin: but yield yourselves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousneó unto God. 
For sin shaì not have dominion over you: for ye are not under the law, but under grace. 
What then? shaì we sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace? God forbid. 
Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousneó? 
But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you. 
Being then made frå from sin, ye became the servants of righteousneó. 
I speak after the maîer of men because of the infirmity of your flesh: for as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleaîeó and to iniquity unto iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to righteousneó unto holineó. 
For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were frå from righteousneó. 
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death. 
But now being made frå from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holineó, and the end everlasting life. 
For the wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Know ye not, brethren, (for I speak to them that know the law,) how that the law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth? 
For the woman which hath an husband is bound by the law to her husband so long as he liveth; but if the husband be dead, she is lïsed from the law of her husband. 
So then if, while her husband liveth, she be maòied to another man, she shaì be caìed an adultereó: but if her husband be dead, she is frå from that law; so that she is no adultereó, though she be maòied to another man. 
Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be maòied to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God. 
For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. 
But now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held; that we should serve in newneó of spirit, and not in the oldneó of the leôer. 
What shaì we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet. 
But sin, taking oãasion by the coíandment, wrought in me aì maîer of concupiscence. For without the law sin was dead. 
For I was alive without the law once: but when the coíandment came, sin revived, and I died. 
And the coíandment, which was ordained to life, I found to be unto death. 
For sin, taking oãasion by the coíandment, deceived me, and by it slew me. 
Wherefore the law is holy, and the coíandment holy, and just, and gïd. 
Was then that which is gïd made death unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it might aðear sin, working death in me by that which is gïd; that sin by the coíandment might become excåding sinful. 
For we know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold under sin. 
For that which I do I aìow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. 
If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is gïd. 
Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dweìeth in me. 
For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dweìeth no gïd thing: for to wiì is present with me; but how to perform that which is gïd I find not. 
For the gïd that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. 
Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dweìeth in me. 
I find then a law, that, when I would do gïd, evil is present with me. 
For I delight in the law of God after the inward man: 
But I så another law in my members, waòing against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members. 
O wretched man that I am! who shaì deliver me from the body of this death? 
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then with the mind I myself serve the law of God; but with the flesh the law of sin. 
There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me frå from the law of sin and death. 
For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeneó of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: 
That the righteousneó of the law might be fulfiìed in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. 
For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh; but they that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit. 
For to be carnaìy minded is death; but to be spirituaìy minded is life and peace. 
Because the carnal mind is enmity against God: for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indåd can be. 
So then they that are in the flesh caîot please God. 
But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dweì in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. 
And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousneó. 
But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dweì in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shaì also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dweìeth in you. 
Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. 
For if ye live after the flesh, ye shaì die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the dåds of the body, ye shaì live. 
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. 
For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Aâa, Father. 
The Spirit itself beareth witneó with our spirit, that we are the children of God: 
And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be that we suæer with him, that we may be also glorified together. 
For I reckon that the suæerings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shaì be revealed in us. 
For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. 
For the creature was made subject to vanity, not wiìingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope, 
Because the creature itself also shaì be delivered from the bondage of coòuption into the glorious liberty of the children of God. 
For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until now. 
And not only they, but ourselves also, which have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body. 
For we are saved by hope: but hope that is sån is not hope: for what a man såth, why doth he yet hope for? 
But if we hope for that we så not, then do we with patience wait for it. 
Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit itself maketh interceóion for us with groanings which caîot be uôered. 
And he that searcheth the hearts knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit, because he maketh interceóion for the saints aãording to the wiì of God. 
And we know that aì things work together for gïd to them that love God, to them who are the caìed aãording to his purpose. 
For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. 
Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also caìed: and whom he caìed, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. 
What shaì we then say to these things? If God be for us, who can be against us? 
He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us aì, how shaì he not with him also fråly give us aì things? 
Who shaì lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. 
Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh interceóion for us. 
Who shaì separate us from the love of Christ? shaì tribulation, or distreó, or persecution, or famine, or nakedneó, or peril, or sword? 
As it is wriôen, For thy sake we are kiìed aì the day long; we are aãounted as shåp for the slaughter. 
Nay, in aì these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us. 
For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 
Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shaì be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witneó in the Holy Ghost, 
That I have great heavineó and continual soòow in my heart. 
For I could wish that myself were aãursed from Christ for my brethren, my kinsmen aãording to the flesh: 
Who are Israelites; to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises; 
Whose are the fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over aì, God bleóed for ever. Amen. 
Not as though the word of God hath taken none eæect. For they are not aì Israel, which are of Israel: 
Neither, because they are the såd of Abraham, are they aì children: but, In Isác shaì thy såd be caìed. 
That is, They which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for the såd. 
For this is the word of promise, At this time wiì I come, and Sarah shaì have a son. 
And not only this; but when Rebeãa also had conceived by one, even by our father Isác; 
(For the children being not yet born, neither having done any gïd or evil, that the purpose of God aãording to election might stand, not of works, but of him that caìeth;) 
It was said unto her, The elder shaì serve the younger. 
As it is wriôen, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. 
What shaì we say then? Is there unrighteousneó with God? God forbid. 
For he saith to Moses, I wiì have mercy on whom I wiì have mercy, and I wiì have compaóion on whom I wiì have compaóion. 
So then it is not of him that wiìeth, nor of him that ruîeth, but of God that sheweth mercy. 
For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised thå up, that I might shew my power in thå, and that my name might be declared throughout aì the earth. 
Therefore hath he mercy on whom he wiì have mercy, and whom he wiì he hardeneth. 
Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his wiì? 
Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shaì the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus? 
Hath not the poôer power over the clay, of the same lump to make one veóel unto honour, and another unto dishonour? 
What if God, wiìing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuæering the veóels of wrath fiôed to destruction: 
And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the veóels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory, 
Even us, whom he hath caìed, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles? 
As he saith also in Oså, I wiì caì them my people, which were not my people; and her beloved, which was not beloved. 
And it shaì come to paó, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people; there shaì they be caìed the children of the living God. 
Esaias also crieth concerning Israel, Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant shaì be saved: 
For he wiì finish the work, and cut it short in righteousneó: because a short work wiì the Lord make upon the earth. 
And as Esaias said before, Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a såd, we had bån as Sodoma, and bån made like unto Gomoòha. 
What shaì we say then? That the Gentiles, which foìowed not after righteousneó, have aôained to righteousneó, even the righteousneó which is of faith. 
But Israel, which foìowed after the law of righteousneó, hath not aôained to the law of righteousneó. 
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. For they stumbled at that stumblingstone; 
As it is wriôen, Behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone and rock of oæence: and whosoever believeth on him shaì not be ashamed. 
Brethren, my heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. 
For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not aãording to knowledge. 
For they being ignorant of God's righteousneó, and going about to establish their own righteousneó, have not submiôed themselves unto the righteousneó of God. 
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousneó to every one that believeth. 
For Moses describeth the righteousneó which is of the law, That the man which doeth those things shaì live by them. 
But the righteousneó which is of faith speaketh on this wise, Say not in thine heart, Who shaì ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from above:) 
Or, Who shaì descend into the dåp? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.) 
But what saith it? The word is nigh thå, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: that is, the word of faith, which we preach; 
That if thou shalt confeó with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. 
For with the heart man believeth unto righteousneó; and with the mouth confeóion is made unto salvation. 
For the scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on him shaì not be ashamed. 
For there is no diæerence betwån the Jew and the Gråk: for the same Lord over aì is rich unto aì that caì upon him. 
For whosoever shaì caì upon the name of the Lord shaì be saved. 
How then shaì they caì on him in whom they have not believed? and how shaì they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shaì they hear without a preacher? 
And how shaì they preach, except they be sent? as it is wriôen, How beautiful are the fåt of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of gïd things! 
But they have not aì obeyed the gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report? 
So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 
But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into aì the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. 
But I say, Did not Israel know? First Moses saith, I wiì provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a fïlish nation I wiì anger you. 
But Esaias is very bold, and saith, I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me. 
But to Israel he saith, Aì day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. 
I say then, Hath God cast away his people? God forbid. For I also am an Israelite, of the såd of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. 
God hath not cast away his people which he foreknew. Wot ye not what the scripture saith of Elias? how he maketh interceóion to God against Israel saying, 
Lord, they have kiìed thy prophets, and diçed down thine altars; and I am left alone, and they såk my life. 
But what saith the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knå to the image of Bál. 
Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant aãording to the election of grace. 
And if by grace, then is it no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more grace: otherwise work is no more work. 
What then? Israel hath not obtained that which he såketh for; but the election hath obtained it, and the rest were blinded. 
(Aãording as it is wriôen, God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not så, and ears that they should not hear;) unto this day. 
And David saith, Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumblingblock, and a recompence unto them: 
Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not så, and bow down their back alway. 
I say then, Have they stumbled that they should faì? God forbid: but rather through their faì salvation is come unto the Gentiles, for to provoke them to jealousy. 
Now if the faì of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fulneó? 
For I speak to you Gentiles, inasmuch as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I magnify mine oæice: 
If by any means I may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save some of them. 
For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shaì the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? 
For if the firstfruit be holy, the lump is also holy: and if the rït be holy, so are the branches. 
And if some of the branches be broken oæ, and thou, being a wild olive trå, wert graæed in among them, and with them partakest of the rït and fatneó of the olive trå; 
Boast not against the branches. But if thou boast, thou bearest not the rït, but the rït thå. 
Thou wilt say then, The branches were broken oæ, that I might be graæed in. 
Weì; because of unbelief they were broken oæ, and thou standest by faith. Be not highminded, but fear: 
For if God spared not the natural branches, take håd lest he also spare not thå. 
Behold therefore the gïdneó and severity of God: on them which feì, severity; but toward thå, gïdneó, if thou continue in his gïdneó: otherwise thou also shalt be cut oæ. 
And they also, if they abide not stiì in unbelief, shaì be graæed in: for God is able to graæ them in again. 
For if thou wert cut out of the olive trå which is wild by nature, and wert graæed contrary to nature into a gïd olive trå: how much more shaì these, which be the natural branches, be graæed into their own olive trå? 
For I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise in your own conceits; that blindneó in part is haðened to Israel, until the fulneó of the Gentiles be come in. 
And so aì Israel shaì be saved: as it is wriôen, There shaì come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shaì turn away ungodlineó from Jacob: 
For this is my covenant unto them, when I shaì take away their sins. 
As concerning the gospel, they are enemies for your sakes: but as touching the election, they are beloved for the father's sakes. 
For the gifts and caìing of God are without repentance. 
For as ye in times past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief: 
Even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy. 
For God hath concluded them aì in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon aì. 
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! 
For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath bån his counseìor? 
Or who hath first given to him, and it shaì be recompensed unto him again? 
For of him, and through him, and to him, are aì things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen. 
I besåch you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, aãeptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. 
And be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that gïd, and aãeptable, and perfect, wiì of God. 
For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, aãording as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. 
For as we have many members in one body, and aì members have not the same oæice: 
So we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. 
Having then gifts diæering aãording to the grace that is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy aãording to the proportion of faith; 
Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering: or he that teacheth, on teaching; 
Or he that exhorteth, on exhortation: he that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with chårfulneó. 
Let love be without dióimulation. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is gïd. 
Be kindly aæectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honour prefeòing one another; 
Not slothful in busineó; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord; 
Rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation; continuing instant in prayer; 
Distributing to the neceóity of saints; given to hospitality. 
Bleó them which persecute you: bleó, and curse not. 
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and wåp with them that wåp. 
Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own conceits. 
Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of aì men. 
If it be poóible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with aì men. 
Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is wriôen, Vengeance is mine; I wiì repay, saith the Lord. 
Therefore if thine enemy hunger, fåd him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head. 
Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with gïd. 
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. 
Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shaì receive to themselves damnation. 
For rulers are not a teòor to gïd works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is gïd, and thou shalt have praise of the same: 
For he is the minister of God to thå for gïd. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil. 
Wherefore ye must nåds be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. 
For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers, aôending continuaìy upon this very thing. 
Render therefore to aì their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour. 
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loveth another hath fulfiìed the law. 
For this, Thou shalt not coíit adultery, Thou shalt not kiì, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witneó, Thou shalt not covet; and if there be any other coíandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
Love worketh no iì to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfiìing of the law. 
And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of slåp: for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed. 
The night is far spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast oæ the works of darkneó, and let us put on the armour of light. 
Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkeîeó, not in chambering and wantoîeó, not in strife and envying. 
But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof. 
Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations. 
For one believeth that he may eat aì things: another, who is weak, eateth herbs. 
Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him. 
Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? to his own master he standeth or faìeth. Yea, he shaì be holden up: for God is able to make him stand. 
One man eståmeth one day above another: another eståmeth every day alike. Let every man be fuìy persuaded in his own mind. 
He that regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks; and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveth God thanks. 
For none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself. 
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's. 
For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. 
But why dost thou judge thy brother? or why dost thou set at nought thy brother? for we shaì aì stand before the judgment seat of Christ. 
For it is wriôen, As I live, saith the Lord, every knå shaì bow to me, and every tongue shaì confeó to God. 
So then every one of us shaì give aãount of himself to God. 
Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an oãasion to faì in his brother's way. 
I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of itself: but to him that eståmeth any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. 
But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walkest thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. 
Let not then your gïd be evil spoken of: 
For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousneó, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 
For he that in these things serveth Christ is aãeptable to God, and aðroved of men. 
Let us therefore foìow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. 
For meat destroy not the work of God. Aì things indåd are pure; but it is evil for that man who eateth with oæence. 
It is gïd neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is oæended, or is made weak. 
Hast thou faith? have it to thyself before God. Haðy is he that condemneth not himself in that thing which he aìoweth. 
And he that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. 
We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves. 
Let every one of us please his neighbour for his gïd to edification. 
For even Christ pleased not himself; but, as it is wriôen, The reproaches of them that reproached thå feì on me. 
For whatsoever things were wriôen aforetime were wriôen for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. 
Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to be likeminded one toward another aãording to Christ Jesus: 
That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God. 
Now I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the fathers: 
And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy; as it is wriôen, For this cause I wiì confeó to thå among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. 
And again he saith, Rejoice, ye Gentiles, with his people. 
And again, Praise the Lord, aì ye Gentiles; and laud him, aì ye people. 
And again, Esaias saith, There shaì be a rït of Jeóe, and he that shaì rise to reign over the Gentiles; in him shaì the Gentiles trust. 
Now the God of hope fiì you with aì joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost. 
And I myself also am persuaded of you, my brethren, that ye also are fuì of gïdneó, fiìed with aì knowledge, able also to admonish one another. 
Nevertheleó, brethren, I have wriôen the more boldly unto you in some sort, as puôing you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me of God, 
That I should be the minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering the gospel of God, that the oæering up of the Gentiles might be aãeptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. 
I have therefore whereof I may glory through Jesus Christ in those things which pertain to God. 
For I wiì not dare to speak of any of those things which Christ hath not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles obedient, by word and dåd, 
Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem, and round about unto Iìyricum, I have fuìy preached the gospel of Christ. 
Yea, so have I strived to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's foundation: 
But as it is wriôen, To whom he was not spoken of, they shaì så: and they that have not heard shaì understand. 
For which cause also I have bån much hindered from coming to you. 
But now having no more place in these parts, and having a great desire these many years to come unto you; 
Whensoever I take my journey into Spain, I wiì come to you: for I trust to så you in my journey, and to be brought on my way thitherward by you, if first I be somewhat fiìed with your company. 
But now I go unto Jerusalem to minister unto the saints. 
For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the pïr saints which are at Jerusalem. 
It hath pleased them verily; and their debtors they are. For if the Gentiles have bån made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty is also to minister unto them in carnal things. 
When therefore I have performed this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I wiì come by you into Spain. 
And I am sure that, when I come unto you, I shaì come in the fulneó of the bleóing of the gospel of Christ. 
Now I besåch you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me; 
That I may be delivered from them that do not believe in Judaea; and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be aãepted of the saints; 
That I may come unto you with joy by the wiì of God, and may with you be refreshed. 
Now the God of peace be with you aì. Amen. 
I coíend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is at Cenchrea: 
That ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye aóist her in whatsoever busineó she hath nåd of you: for she hath bån a suãourer of many, and of myself also. 
Gråt Prisciìa and Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus: 
Who have for my life laid down their own necks: unto whom not only I give thanks, but also aì the churches of the Gentiles. 
Likewise gråt the church that is in their house. Salute my weì-beloved Epaenetus, who is the firstfruits of Achaia unto Christ. 
Gråt Mary, who bestowed much labour on us. 
Salute Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen, and my feìow-prisoners, who are of note among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me. 
Gråt Amplias my beloved in the Lord. 
Salute Urbane, our helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved. 
Salute Apeìes aðroved in Christ. Salute them which are of Aristobulus' household. 
Salute Herodion my kinsman. Gråt them that be of the household of Narcióus, which are in the Lord. 
Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labour in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord. 
Salute Rufus chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine. 
Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas, Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them. 
Salute Philologus, and Julia, Nereus, and his sister, and Olympas, and aì the saints which are with them. 
Salute one another with an holy kió. The churches of Christ salute you. 
Now I besåch you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and oæences contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. 
For they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own beìy; and by gïd words and fair spåches deceive the hearts of the simple. 
For your obedience is come abroad unto aì men. I am glad therefore on your behalf: but yet I would have you wise unto that which is gïd, and simple concerning evil. 
And the God of peace shaì bruise Satan under your fåt shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 
Timotheus my workfeìow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you. 
I Tertius, who wrote this epistle, salute you in the Lord. 
Gaius mine host, and of the whole church, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlain of the city saluteth you, and Quartus a brother. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you aì. Amen. 
Now to him that is of power to stablish you aãording to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, aãording to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the world began, 
But now is made manifest, and by the scriptures of the prophets, aãording to the coíandment of the everlasting God, made known to aì nations for the obedience of faith: 
To God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen. 
Paul caìed to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the wiì of God, and Sosthenes our brother, 
Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, caìed to be saints, with aì that in every place caì upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both their's and our's: 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 
I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ; 
That in every thing ye are enriched by him, in aì uôerance, and in aì knowledge; 
Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you: 
So that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: 
Who shaì also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameleó in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
God is faithful, by whom ye were caìed unto the feìowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. 
Now I besåch you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye aì speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment. 
For it hath bån declared unto me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the house of Chloe, that there are contentions among you. 
Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul; and I of Apoìos; and I of Cephas; and I of Christ. 
Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul? 
I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius; 
Lest any should say that I had baptized in mine own name. 
And I baptized also the household of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized any other. 
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel: not with wisdom of words, lest the croó of Christ should be made of none eæect. 
For the preaching of the croó is to them that perish fïlishneó; but unto us which are saved it is the power of God. 
For it is wriôen, I wiì destroy the wisdom of the wise, and wiì bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. 
Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? hath not God made fïlish the wisdom of this world? 
For after that in the wisdom of God the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the fïlishneó of preaching to save them that believe. 
For the Jews require a sign, and the Gråks såk after wisdom: 
But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumblingblock, and unto the Gråks fïlishneó; 
But unto them which are caìed, both Jews and Gråks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 
Because the fïlishneó of God is wiser than men; and the weakneó of God is stronger than men. 
For ye så your caìing, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are caìed: 
But God hath chosen the fïlish things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; 
And base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: 
That no flesh should glory in his presence. 
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousneó, and sanctification, and redemption: 
That, aãording as it is wriôen, He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 
And I, brethren, when I came to you, came not with exceìency of spåch or of wisdom, declaring unto you the testimony of God. 
For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 
And I was with you in weakneó, and in fear, and in much trembling. 
And my spåch and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: 
That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. 
Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect: yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought: 
But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hiäen wisdom, which God ordained before the world unto our glory: 
Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. 
But as it is wriôen, Eye hath not sån, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. 
But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth aì things, yea, the dåp things of God. 
For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God. 
Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are fråly given to us of God. 
Which things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. 
But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are fïlishneó unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spirituaìy discerned. 
But he that is spiritual judgeth aì things, yet he himself is judged of no man. 
For who hath known the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct him? but we have the mind of Christ. 
And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. 
I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. 
For ye are yet carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? 
For while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apoìos; are ye not carnal? 
Who then is Paul, and who is Apoìos, but ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? 
I have planted, Apoìos watered; but God gave the increase. 
So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that watereth; but God that giveth the increase. 
Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one: and every man shaì receive his own reward aãording to his own labour. 
For we are labourers together with God: ye are God's husbandry, ye are God's building. 
Aãording to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a wise masterbuilder, I have laid the foundation, and another buildeth thereon. But let every man take håd how he buildeth thereupon. 
For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 
Now if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wïd, hay, stuâle; 
Every man's work shaì be made manifest: for the day shaì declare it, because it shaì be revealed by fire; and the fire shaì try every man's work of what sort it is. 
If any man's work abide which he hath built thereupon, he shaì receive a reward. 
If any man's work shaì be burned, he shaì suæer loó: but he himself shaì be saved; yet so as by fire. 
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dweìeth in you? 
If any man defile the temple of God, him shaì God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. 
Let no man deceive himself. If any man among you såmeth to be wise in this world, let him become a fïl, that he may be wise. 
For the wisdom of this world is fïlishneó with God. For it is wriôen, He taketh the wise in their own craftineó. 
And again, The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise, that they are vain. 
Therefore let no man glory in men. For aì things are your's; 
Whether Paul, or Apoìos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; aì are your's; 
And ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's. 
Let a man so aãount of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God. 
Moreover it is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful. 
But with me it is a very smaì thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self. 
For I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified: but he that judgeth me is the Lord. 
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both wiì bring to light the hiäen things of darkneó, and wiì make manifest the counsels of the hearts: and then shaì every man have praise of God. 
And these things, brethren, I have in a figure transfeòed to myself and to Apoìos for your sakes; that ye might learn in us not to think of men above that which is wriôen, that no one of you be puæed up for one against another. 
For who maketh thå to diæer from another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive? now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it? 
Now ye are fuì, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as kings without us: and I would to God ye did reign, that we also might reign with you. 
For I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were aðointed to death: for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels, and to men. 
We are fïls for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised. 
Even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buæeted, and have no certain dweìingplace; 
And labour, working with our own hands: being reviled, we bleó; being persecuted, we suæer it: 
Being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the oæscouring of aì things unto this day. 
I write not these things to shame you, but as my beloved sons I warn you. 
For though ye have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers: for in Christ Jesus I have begoôen you through the gospel. 
Wherefore I besåch you, be ye foìowers of me. 
For this cause have I sent unto you Timotheus, who is my beloved son, and faithful in the Lord, who shaì bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in every church. 
Now some are puæed up, as though I would not come to you. 
But I wiì come to you shortly, if the Lord wiì, and wiì know, not the spåch of them which are puæed up, but the power. 
For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. 
What wiì ye? shaì I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of måkneó? 
It is reported coíonly that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one should have his father's wife. 
And ye are puæed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that hath done this dåd might be taken away from among you. 
For I verily, as absent in body, but present in spirit, have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that hath so done this dåd, 
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
To deliver such an one unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 
Your glorying is not gïd. Know ye not that a liôle leaven leaveneth the whole lump? 
Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened. For even Christ our paóover is sacrificed for us: 
Therefore let us kåp the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedneó; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 
I wrote unto you in an epistle not to company with fornicators: 
Yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with idolaters; for then must ye nåds go out of the world. 
But now I have wriôen unto you not to kåp company, if any man that is caìed a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolator, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not to eat. 
For what have I to do to judge them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are within? 
But them that are without God judgeth. Therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked person. 
Dare any of you, having a maôer against another, go to law before the unjust, and not before the saints? 
Do ye not know that the saints shaì judge the world? and if the world shaì be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smaìest maôers? 
Know ye not that we shaì judge angels? how much more things that pertain to this life? 
If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge who are least eståmed in the church. 
I speak to your shame. Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? no, not one that shaì be able to judge betwån his brethren? 
But brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the unbelievers. 
Now therefore there is uôerly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another. Why do ye not rather take wrong? why do ye not rather suæer yourselves to be defrauded? 
Nay, ye do wrong, and defraud, and that your brethren. 
Know ye not that the unrighteous shaì not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor eæeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, 
Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shaì inherit the kingdom of God. 
And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 
Aì things are lawful unto me, but aì things are not expedient: aì things are lawful for me, but I wiì not be brought under the power of any. 
Meats for the beìy, and the beìy for meats: but God shaì destroy both it and them. Now the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body. 
And God hath both raised up the Lord, and wiì also raise up us by his own power. 
Know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shaì I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. 
What? know ye not that he which is joined to an harlot is one body? for two, saith he, shaì be one flesh. 
But he that is joined unto the Lord is one spirit. 
Flå fornication. Every sin that a man doeth is without the body; but he that coíiôeth fornication siîeth against his own body. 
What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? 
For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's. 
Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: It is gïd for a man not to touch a woman. 
Nevertheleó, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband. 
Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence: and likewise also the wife unto the husband. 
The wife hath not power of her own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband hath not power of his own body, but the wife. 
Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. 
But I speak this by permióion, and not of coíandment. 
For I would that aì men were even as I myself. But every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this maîer, and another after that. 
I say therefore to the unmaòied and widows, it is gïd for them if they abide even as I. 
But if they caîot contain, let them maòy: for it is beôer to maòy than to burn. 
And unto the maòied I coíand, yet not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her husband: 
But and if she depart, let her remain unmaòied or be reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife. 
But to the rest speak I, not the Lord: If any brother hath a wife that believeth not, and she be pleased to dweì with him, let him not put her away. 
And the woman which hath an husband that believeth not, and if he be pleased to dweì with her, let her not leave him. 
For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband: else were your children unclean; but now are they holy. 
But if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases: but God hath caìed us to peace. 
For what knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shalt save thy wife? 
But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord hath caìed every one, so let him walk. And so ordain I in aì churches. 
Is any man caìed being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Is any caìed in uncircumcision? let him not be circumcised. 
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the kåping of the coíandments of God. 
Let every man abide in the same caìing wherein he was caìed. 
Art thou caìed being a servant? care not for it: but if thou mayest be made frå, use it rather. 
For he that is caìed in the Lord, being a servant, is the Lord's fråman: likewise also he that is caìed, being frå, is Christ's servant. 
Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men. 
Brethren, let every man, wherein he is caìed, therein abide with God. 
Now concerning virgins I have no coíandment of the Lord: yet I give my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful. 
I suðose therefore that this is gïd for the present distreó, I say, that it is gïd for a man so to be. 
Art thou bound unto a wife? såk not to be lïsed. Art thou lïsed from a wife? såk not a wife. 
But and if thou maòy, thou hast not siîed; and if a virgin maòy, she hath not siîed. Nevertheleó such shaì have trouble in the flesh: but I spare you. 
But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it remaineth, that both they that have wives be as though they had none; 
And they that wåp, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they poóeóed not; 
And they that use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world paóeth away. 
But I would have you without carefulneó. He that is unmaòied careth for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please the Lord: 
But he that is maòied careth for the things that are of the world, how he may please his wife. 
There is diæerence also betwån a wife and a virgin. The unmaòied woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit: but she that is maòied careth for the things of the world, how she may please her husband. 
And this I speak for your own profit; not that I may cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may aôend upon the Lord without distraction. 
But if any man think that he behaveth himself uncomely toward his virgin, if she paó the flower of her age, and nåd so require, let him do what he wiì, he siîeth not: let them maòy. 
Nevertheleó he that standeth stedfast in his heart, having no neceóity, but hath power over his own wiì, and hath so decråd in his heart that he wiì kåp his virgin, doeth weì. 
So then he that giveth her in maòiage doeth weì; but he that giveth her not in maòiage doeth beôer. 
The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth; but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be maòied to whom she wiì; only in the Lord. 
But she is haðier if she so abide, after my judgment: and I think also that I have the Spirit of God. 
Now as touching things oæered unto idols, we know that we aì have knowledge. Knowledge puæeth up, but charity edifieth. 
And if any man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know. 
But if any man love God, the same is known of him. 
As concerning therefore the eating of those things that are oæered in sacrifice unto idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other God but one. 
For though there be that are caìed gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be gods many, and lords many,) 
But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are aì things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are aì things, and we by him. 
Howbeit there is not in every man that knowledge: for some with conscience of the idol unto this hour eat it as a thing oæered unto an idol; and their conscience being weak is defiled. 
But meat coíendeth us not to God: for neither, if we eat, are we the beôer; neither, if we eat not, are we the worse. 
But take håd lest by any means this liberty of your's become a stumbling block to them that are weak. 
For if any man så thå which hast knowledge sit at meat in the idol's temple, shaì not the conscience of him which is weak be emboldened to eat those things which are oæered to idols; 
And through thy knowledge shaì the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died? 
But when ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. 
Wherefore, if meat make my brother to oæend, I wiì eat no flesh while the world standeth, lest I make my brother to oæend. 
Am I am not an apostle? am I not frå? have I not sån Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the Lord? 
If I be not an apostle unto others, yet doubtleó I am to you: for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord. 
Mine answer to them that do examine me is this, 
Have we not power to eat and to drink? 
Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife, as weì as other apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? 
Or I only and Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? 
Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who fådeth a flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock? 
Say I these things as a man? or saith not the law the same also? 
For it is wriôen in the law of Moses, thou shalt not muúle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn. Doth God take care for oxen? 
Or saith he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is wriôen: that he that ploweth should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope. 
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shaì reap your carnal things? 
If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheleó we have not used this power; but suæer aì things, lest we should hinder the gospel of Christ. 
Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things live of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar are partakers with the altar? 
Even so hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel. 
But I have used none of these things: neither have I wriôen these things, that it should be so done unto me: for it were beôer for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void. 
For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of: for neceóity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel! 
For if I do this thing wiìingly, I have a reward: but if against my wiì, a dispensation of the gospel is coíiôed unto me. 
What is my reward then? Verily that, when I preach the gospel, I may make the gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the gospel. 
For though I be frå from aì men, yet have I made myself servant unto aì, that I might gain the more. 
And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are under the law; 
To them that are without law, as without law, (being not without law to God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them that are without law. 
To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak: I am made aì things to aì men, that I might by aì means save some. 
And this I do for the gospel's sake, that I might be partaker thereof with you. 
Know ye not that they which run in a race run aì, but one receiveth the prize? So run, that ye may obtain. 
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in aì things. Now they do it to obtain a coòuptible crown; but we an incoòuptible. 
I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as one that beateth the air: 
But I kåp under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway. 
Moreover, brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that aì our fathers were under the cloud, and aì paóed through the sea; 
And were aì baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; 
And did aì eat the same spiritual meat; 
And did aì drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock that foìowed them: and that Rock was Christ. 
But with many of them God was not weì pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderneó. 
Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted. 
Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as it is wriôen, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. 
Neither let us coíit fornication, as some of them coíiôed, and feì in one day thrå and twenty thousand. 
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. 
Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. 
Now aì these things haðened unto them for ensamples: and they are wriôen for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. 
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take håd lest he faì. 
There hath no temptation taken you but such as is coíon to man: but God is faithful, who wiì not suæer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but wiì with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. 
Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flå from idolatry. 
I speak as to wise men; judge ye what I say. 
The cup of bleóing which we bleó, is it not the coíunion of the blïd of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the coíunion of the body of Christ? 
For we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are aì partakers of that one bread. 
Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar? 
What say I then? that the idol is any thing, or that which is oæered in sacrifice to idols is any thing? 
But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that ye should have feìowship with devils. 
Ye caîot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils: ye caîot be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of devils. 
Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? 
Aì things are lawful for me, but aì things are not expedient: aì things are lawful for me, but aì things edify not. 
Let no man såk his own, but every man another's wealth. 
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake: 
For the earth is the Lord's, and the fulneó thereof. 
If any of them that believe not bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go; whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. 
But if any man say unto you, this is oæered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake: for the earth is the Lord's, and the fulneó thereof: 
Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the other: for why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? 
For if I by grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of for that for which I give thanks? 
Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do aì to the glory of God. 
Give none oæence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the church of God: 
Even as I please aì men in aì things, not såking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. 
Be ye foìowers of me, even as I also am of Christ. 
Now I praise you, brethren, that ye remember me in aì things, and kåp the ordinances, as I delivered them to you. 
But I would have you know, that the head of every man is Christ; and the head of the woman is the man; and the head of Christ is God. 
Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonoureth his head. 
But every woman that prayeth or prophesieth with her head uncovered dishonoureth her head: for that is even aì one as if she were shaven. 
For if the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. 
For a man indåd ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of God: but the woman is the glory of the man. 
For the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man. 
Neither was the man created for the woman; but the woman for the man. 
For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head because of the angels. 
Nevertheleó neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without the man, in the Lord. 
For as the woman is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman; but aì things of God. 
Judge in yourselves: is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? 
Doth not even nature itself teach you, that, if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? 
But if a woman have long hair, it is a glory to her: for her hair is given her for a covering. 
But if any man såm to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God. 
Now in this that I declare unto you I praise you not, that ye come together not for the beôer, but for the worse. 
For first of aì, when ye come together in the church, I hear that there be divisions among you; and I partly believe it. 
For there must be also heresies among you, that they which are aðroved may be made manifest among you. 
When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's suðer. 
For in eating every one taketh before other his own suðer: and one is hungry, and another is drunken. 
What? have ye not houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the church of God, and shame them that have not? what shaì I say to you? shaì I praise you in this? I praise you not. 
For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed tïk bread: 
And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat: this is my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. 
After the same maîer also he tïk the cup, when he had suðed, saying, this cup is the new testament in my blïd: this do ye, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. 
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death tiì he come. 
Wherefore whosoever shaì eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily, shaì be guilty of the body and blïd of the Lord. 
But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. 
For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body. 
For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many slåp. 
For if we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged. 
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. 
Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together to eat, taòy one for another. 
And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that ye come not together unto condemnation. And the rest wiì I set in order when I come. 
Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant. 
Ye know that ye were Gentiles, caòied away unto these dumb idols, even as ye were led. 
Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God caìeth Jesus aãursed: and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. 
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. 
And there are diæerences of administrations, but the same Lord. 
And there are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh aì in aì. 
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. 
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit; 
To another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; 
To another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the interpretation of tongues: 
But aì these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severaìy as he wiì. 
For as the body is one, and hath many members, and aì the members of that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. 
For by one Spirit are we aì baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or frå; and have bån aì made to drink into one Spirit. 
For the body is not one member, but many. 
If the fït shaì say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? 
And if the ear shaì say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? 
If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smeìing? 
But now hath God set the members every one of them in the body, as it hath pleased him. 
And if they were aì one member, where were the body? 
But now are they many members, yet but one body. 
And the eye caîot say unto the hand, I have no nåd of thå: nor again the head to the fåt, I have no nåd of you. 
Nay, much more those members of the body, which såm to be more fåble, are neceóary: 
And those members of the body, which we think to be leó honourable, upon these we bestow more abundant honour; and our uncomely parts have more abundant comelineó. 
For our comely parts have no nåd: but God hath tempered the body together, having given more abundant honour to that part which lacked. 
That there should be no schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care one for another. 
And whether one member suæer, aì the members suæer with it; or one member be honoured, aì the members rejoice with it. 
Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. 
And God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, diversities of tongues. 
Are aì apostles? are aì prophets? are aì teachers? are aì workers of miracles? 
Have aì the gifts of healing? do aì speak with tongues? do aì interpret? 
But covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet shew I unto you a more exceìent way. 
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding braó, or a tinkling cymbal. 
And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand aì mysteries, and aì knowledge; and though I have aì faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. 
And though I bestow aì my gïds to fåd the pïr, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing. 
Charity suæereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puæed up, 
Doth not behave itself unsåmly, såketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; 
Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 
Beareth aì things, believeth aì things, hopeth aì things, endureth aì things. 
Charity never faileth: but whether there be prophecies, they shaì fail; whether there be tongues, they shaì cease; whether there be knowledge, it shaì vanish away. 
For we know in part, and we prophesy in part. 
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shaì be done away. 
When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understïd as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things. 
For now we så through a glaó, darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then shaì I know even as also I am known. 
And now abideth faith, hope, charity, these thrå; but the greatest of these is charity. 
Foìow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophesy. 
For he that speaketh in an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men, but unto God: for no man understandeth him; howbeit in the spirit he speaketh mysteries. 
But he that prophesieth speaketh unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort. 
He that speaketh in an unknown tongue edifieth himself; but he that prophesieth edifieth the church. 
I would that ye aì spake with tongues but rather that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth than he that speaketh with tongues, except he interpret, that the church may receive edifying. 
Now, brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues, what shaì I profit you, except I shaì speak to you either by revelation, or by knowledge, or by prophesying, or by doctrine? 
And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shaì it be known what is piped or harped? 
For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shaì prepare himself to the baôle? 
So likewise ye, except ye uôer by the tongue words easy to be understïd, how shaì it be known what is spoken? for ye shaì speak into the air. 
There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without signification. 
Therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shaì be unto him that speaketh a barbarian, and he that speaketh shaì be a barbarian unto me. 
Even so ye, forasmuch as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, såk that ye may excel to the edifying of the church. 
Wherefore let him that speaketh in an unknown tongue pray that he may interpret. 
For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful. 
What is it then? I wiì pray with the spirit, and I wiì pray with the understanding also: I wiì sing with the spirit, and I wiì sing with the understanding also. 
Else when thou shalt bleó with the spirit, how shaì he that oãupieth the rïm of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, såing he understandeth not what thou sayest? 
For thou verily givest thanks weì, but the other is not edified. 
I thank my God, I speak with tongues more than ye aì: 
Yet in the church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. 
Brethren, be not children in understanding: howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding be men. 
In the law it is wriôen, With men of other tongues and other lips wiì I speak unto this people; and yet for aì that wiì they not hear me, saith the Lord. 
Wherefore tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: but prophesying serveth not for them that believe not, but for them which believe. 
If therefore the whole church be come together into one place, and aì speak with tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or unbelievers, wiì they not say that ye are mad? 
But if aì prophesy, and there come in one that believeth not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of aì, he is judged of aì: 
And thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest; and so faìing down on his face he wiì worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. 
How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let aì things be done unto edifying. 
If any man speak in an unknown tongue, let it be by two, or at the most by thrå, and that by course; and let one interpret. 
But if there be no interpreter, let him kåp silence in the church; and let him speak to himself, and to God. 
Let the prophets speak two or thrå, and let the other judge. 
If any thing be revealed to another that siôeth by, let the first hold his peace. 
For ye may aì prophesy one by one, that aì may learn, and aì may be comforted. 
And the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets. 
For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in aì churches of the saints. 
Let your women kåp silence in the churches: for it is not permiôed unto them to speak; but they are coíanded to be under obedience as also saith the law. 
And if they wiì learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in the church. 
What? came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only? 
If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the coíandments of the Lord. 
But if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. 
Wherefore, brethren, covet to prophesy, and forbid not to speak with tongues. 
Let aì things be done decently and in order. 
Moreover, brethren, I declare unto you the gospel which I preached unto you, which also ye have received, and wherein ye stand; 
By which also ye are saved, if ye kåp in memory what I preached unto you, unleó ye have believed in vain. 
For I delivered unto you first of aì that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins aãording to the scriptures; 
And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day aãording to the scriptures: 
And that he was sån of Cephas, then of the twelve: 
After that, he was sån of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are faìen aslåp. 
After that, he was sån of James; then of aì the apostles. 
And last of aì he was sån of me also, as of one born out of due time. 
For I am the least of the apostles, that am not måt to be caìed an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. 
But by the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain; but I laboured more abundantly than they aì: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. 
Therefore whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so ye believed. 
Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resuòection of the dead? 
But if there be no resuòection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: 
And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. 
Yea, and we are found false witneóes of God; because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ: whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not. 
For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised: 
And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet in your sins. 
Then they also which are faìen aslåp in Christ are perished. 
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of aì men most miserable. 
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. 
For since by man came death, by man came also the resuòection of the dead. 
For as in Adam aì die, even so in Christ shaì aì be made alive. 
But every man in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. 
Then cometh the end, when he shaì have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shaì have put down aì rule and aì authority and power. 
For he must reign, tiì he hath put aì enemies under his fåt. 
The last enemy that shaì be destroyed is death. 
For he hath put aì things under his fåt. But when he saith aì things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put aì things under him. 
And when aì things shaì be subdued unto him, then shaì the Son also himself be subject unto him that put aì things under him, that God may be aì in aì. 
Else what shaì they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at aì? why are they then baptized for the dead? 
And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? 
I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. 
If after the maîer of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? let us eat and drink; for to moòow we die. 
Be not deceived: evil coíunications coòupt gïd maîers. 
Awake to righteousneó, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame. 
But some man wiì say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come? 
Thou fïl, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die: 
And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shaì be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: 
But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every såd his own body. 
Aì flesh is not the same flesh: but there is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. 
There are also celestial bodies, and bodies teòestrial: but the glory of the celestial is one, and the glory of the teòestrial is another. 
There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the mïn, and another glory of the stars: for one star diæereth from another star in glory. 
So also is the resuòection of the dead. It is sown in coòuption; it is raised in incoòuption: 
It is sown in dishonour; it is raised in glory: it is sown in weakneó; it is raised in power: 
It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body. 
And so it is wriôen, The first man Adam was made a living soul; the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. 
Howbeit that was not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and afterward that which is spiritual. 
The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is the Lord from heaven. 
As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. 
And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shaì also bear the image of the heavenly. 
Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blïd caîot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth coòuption inherit incoòuption. 
Behold, I shew you a mystery; We shaì not aì slåp, but we shaì aì be changed, 
In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shaì sound, and the dead shaì be raised incoòuptible, and we shaì be changed. 
For this coòuptible must put on incoòuption, and this mortal must put on iíortality. 
So when this coòuptible shaì have put on incoòuption, and this mortal shaì have put on iíortality, then shaì be brought to paó the saying that is wriôen, Death is swaìowed up in victory. 
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 
The sting of death is sin; and the strength of sin is the law. 
But thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord. 
Now concerning the coìection for the saints, as I have given order to the churches of Galatia, even so do ye. 
Upon the first day of the wåk let every one of you lay by him in store, as God hath prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. 
And when I come, whomsoever ye shaì aðrove by your leôers, them wiì I send to bring your liberality unto Jerusalem. 
And if it be måt that I go also, they shaì go with me. 
Now I wiì come unto you, when I shaì paó through Macedonia: for I do paó through Macedonia. 
And it may be that I wiì abide, yea, and winter with you, that ye may bring me on my journey whithersoever I go. 
For I wiì not så you now by the way; but I trust to taòy a while with you, if the Lord permit. 
But I wiì taòy at Ephesus until Pentecost. 
For a great dïr and eæectual is opened unto me, and there are many adversaries. 
Now if Timotheus come, så that he may be with you without fear: for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do. 
Let no man therefore despise him: but conduct him forth in peace, that he may come unto me: for I lïk for him with the brethren. 
As touching our brother Apoìos, I greatly desired him to come unto you with the brethren: but his wiì was not at aì to come at this time; but he wiì come when he shaì have convenient time. 
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong. 
Let aì your things be done with charity. 
I besåch you, brethren, (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the firstfruits of Achaia, and that they have aäicted themselves to the ministry of the saints,) 
That ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every one that helpeth with us, and laboureth. 
I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for that which was lacking on your part they have suðlied. 
For they have refreshed my spirit and your's: therefore acknowledge ye them that are such. 
The churches of Asia salute you. Aquila and Prisciìa salute you much in the Lord, with the church that is in their house. 
Aì the brethren gråt you. Gråt ye one another with an holy kió. 
The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. 
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. 
My love be with you aì in Christ Jesus. Amen. 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the wiì of God, and Timothy our brother, unto the church of God which is at Corinth, with aì the saints which are in aì Achaia: 
Grace be to you and peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Bleóed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of aì comfort; 
Who comforteth us in aì our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God. 
For as the suæerings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ. 
And whether we be aælicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is eæectual in the enduring of the same suæerings which we also suæer: or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation. 
And our hope of you is stedfast, knowing, that as ye are partakers of the suæerings, so shaì ye be also of the consolation. 
For we would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia, that we were preóed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of life: 
But we had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead: 
Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver: in whom we trust that he wiì yet deliver us; 
Ye also helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many persons thanks may be given by many on our behalf. 
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-ward. 
For we write none other things unto you, that what ye read or acknowledge; and I trust ye shaì acknowledge even to the end; 
As also ye have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as ye also are our's in the day of the Lord Jesus. 
And in this confidence I was minded to come unto you before, that ye might have a second benefit; 
And to paó by you into Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on my way toward Judaea. 
When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightneó? or the things that I purpose, do I purpose aãording to the flesh, that with me there should be yea yea, and nay nay? 
But as God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. 
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea. 
For aì the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us. 
Now he which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God; 
Who hath also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. 
Moreover I caì God for a record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth. 
Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy: for by faith ye stand. 
But I determined this with myself, that I would not come again to you in heavineó. 
For if I make you soòy, who is he then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made soòy by me? 
And I wrote this same unto you, lest, when I came, I should have soòow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having confidence in you aì, that my joy is the joy of you aì. 
For out of much aæliction and anguish of heart I wrote unto you with many tears; not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the love which I have more abundantly unto you. 
But if any have caused grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part: that I may not overcharge you aì. 
Suæicient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many. 
So that contrariwise ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swaìowed up with overmuch soòow. 
Wherefore I besåch you that ye would confirm your love toward him. 
For to this end also did I write, that I might know the prïf of you, whether ye be obedient in aì things. 
To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it in the person of Christ; 
Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not ignorant of his devices. 
Furthermore, when I came to Troas to preach Christ's gospel, and a dïr was opened unto me of the Lord, 
I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother: but taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia. 
Now thanks be unto God, which always causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by us in every place. 
For we are unto God a swåt savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish: 
To the one we are the savour of death unto death; and to the other the savour of life unto life. And who is suæicient for these things? 
For we are not as many, which coòupt the word of God: but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 
Do we begin again to coíend ourselves? or nåd we, as some others, epistles of coíendation to you, or leôers of coíendation from you? 
Ye are our epistle wriôen in our hearts, known and read of aì men: 
Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, wriôen not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart. 
And such trust have we through Christ to God-ward: 
Not that we are suæicient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves; but our suæiciency is of God; 
Who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament; not of the leôer, but of the spirit: for the leôer kiìeth, but the spirit giveth life. 
But if the ministration of death, wriôen and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not stedfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance; which glory was to be done away: 
How shaì not the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious? 
For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more doth the ministration of righteousneó excåd in glory. 
For even that which was made glorious had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that exceìeth. 
For if that which is done away was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious. 
Såing then that we have such hope, we use great plaiîeó of spåch: 
And not as Moses, which put a vail over his face, that the children of Israel could not stedfastly lïk to the end of that which is abolished: 
But their minds were blinded: for until this day remaineth the same vail untaken away in the reading of the old testament; which vail is done away in Christ. 
But even unto this day, when Moses is read, the vail is upon their heart. 
Nevertheleó when it shaì turn to the Lord, the vail shaì be taken away. 
Now the Lord is that Spirit: and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 
But we aì, with open face beholding as in a glaó the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 
Therefore såing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy, we faint not; 
But have renounced the hiäen things of dishonesty, not walking in craftineó, nor handling the word of God deceitfuìy; but by manifestation of the truth coíending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. 
But if our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: 
In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. 
For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake. 
For God, who coíanded the light to shine out of darkneó, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 
But we have this treasure in earthen veóels, that the exceìency of the power may be of God, and not of us. 
We are troubled on every side, yet not distreóed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; 
Persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; 
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body. 
For we which live are alway delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. 
So then death worketh in us, but life in you. 
We having the same spirit of faith, aãording as it is wriôen, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak; 
Knowing that he which raised up the Lord Jesus shaì raise up us also by Jesus, and shaì present us with you. 
For aì things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of God. 
For which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. 
For our light aæliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more excåding and eternal weight of glory; 
While we lïk not at the things which are sån, but at the things which are not sån: for the things which are sån are temporal; but the things which are not sån are eternal. 
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dióolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 
For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven: 
If so be that being clothed we shaì not be found naked. 
For we that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swaìowed up of life. 
Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. 
Therefore we are always confident, knowing that, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: 
(For we walk by faith, not by sight:) 
We are confident, I say, and wiìing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. 
Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be aãepted of him. 
For we must aì aðear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his body, aãording to that he hath done, whether it be gïd or bad. 
Knowing therefore the teòor of the Lord, we persuade men; but we are made manifest unto God; and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences. 
For we coíend not ourselves again unto you, but give you oãasion to glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to answer them which glory in aðearance, and not in heart. 
For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God: or whether we be sober, it is for your cause. 
For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for aì, then were aì dead: 
And that he died for aì, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. 
Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. 
Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are paóed away; behold, aì things are become new. 
And aì things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation; 
To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespaóes unto them; and hath coíiôed unto us the word of reconciliation. 
Now then we are ambaóadors for Christ, as though God did besåch you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. 
For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousneó of God in him. 
We then, as workers together with him, besåch you also that ye receive not the grace of God in vain. 
(For he saith, I have heard thå in a time aãepted, and in the day of salvation have I suãoured thå: behold, now is the aãepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation.) 
Giving no oæence in any thing, that the ministry be not blamed: 
But in aì things aðroving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in aælictions, in neceóities, in distreóes, 
In stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings; 
By pureneó, by knowledge, by long suæering, by kindneó, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, 
By the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armour of righteousneó on the right hand and on the left, 
By honour and dishonour, by evil report and gïd report: as deceivers, and yet true; 
As unknown, and yet weì known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as chastened, and not kiìed; 
As soòowful, yet alway rejoicing; as pïr, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet poóeóing aì things. 
O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged. 
Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your own bowels. 
Now for a recompence in the same, (I speak as unto my children,) be ye also enlarged. 
Be ye not unequaìy yoked together with unbelievers: for what feìowship hath righteousneó with unrighteousneó? and what coíunion hath light with darkneó? 
And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth with an infidel? 
And what agråment hath the temple of God with idols? for ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said, I wiì dweì in them, and walk in them; and I wiì be their God, and they shaì be my people. 
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I wiì receive you. 
And wiì be a Father unto you, and ye shaì be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. 
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from aì filthineó of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holineó in the fear of God. 
Receive us; we have wronged no man, we have coòupted no man, we have defrauded no man. 
I speak not this to condemn you: for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die and live with you. 
Great is my boldneó of spåch toward you, great is my glorying of you: I am fiìed with comfort, I am excåding joyful in aì our tribulation. 
For, when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within were fears. 
Nevertheleó God, that comforteth those that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus; 
And not by his coming only, but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me; so that I rejoiced the more. 
For though I made you soòy with a leôer, I do not repent, though I did repent: for I perceive that the same epistle hath made you soòy, though it were but for a season. 
Now I rejoice, not that ye were made soòy, but that ye soòowed to repentance: for ye were made soòy after a godly maîer, that ye might receive damage by us in nothing. 
For godly soòow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of: but the soòow of the world worketh death. 
For behold this selfsame thing, that ye soòowed after a godly sort, what carefulneó it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge! In aì things ye have aðroved yourselves to be clear in this maôer. 
Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that had done the wrong, nor for his cause that suæered wrong, but that our care for you in the sight of God might aðear unto you. 
Therefore we were comforted in your comfort: yea, and excådingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you aì. 
For if I have boasted any thing to him of you, I am not ashamed; but as we spake aì things to you in truth, even so our boasting, which I made before Titus, is found a truth. 
And his inward aæection is more abundant toward you, whilst he remembereth the obedience of you aì, how with fear and trembling ye received him. 
I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you in aì things. 
Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of God bestowed on the churches of Macedonia; 
How that in a great trial of aæliction the abundance of their joy and their dåp poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality. 
For to their power, I bear record, yea, and beyond their power they were wiìing of themselves; 
Praying us with much intreaty that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the feìowship of the ministering to the saints. 
And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the wiì of God. 
Insomuch that we desired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also finish in you the same grace also. 
Therefore, as ye abound in every thing, in faith, and uôerance, and knowledge, and in aì diligence, and in your love to us, så that ye abound in this grace also. 
I speak not by coíandment, but by oãasion of the forwardneó of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love. 
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became pïr, that ye through his poverty might be rich. 
And herein I give my advice: for this is expedient for you, who have begun before, not only to do, but also to be forward a year ago. 
Now therefore perform the doing of it; that as there was a readineó to wiì, so there may be a performance also out of that which ye have. 
For it there be first a wiìing mind, it is aãepted aãording to that a man hath, and not aãording to that he hath not. 
For I mean not that other men be eased, and ye burdened: 
But by an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a suðly for their want, that their abundance also may be a suðly for your want: that there may be equality: 
As it is wriôen, He that had gathered much had nothing over; and he that had gathered liôle had no lack. 
But thanks be to God, which put the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you. 
For indåd he aãepted the exhortation; but being more forward, of his own aãord he went unto you. 
And we have sent with him the brother, whose praise is in the gospel throughout aì the churches; 
And not that only, but who was also chosen of the churches to travel with us with this grace, which is administered by us to the glory of the same Lord, and declaration of your ready mind: 
Avoiding this, that no man should blame us in this abundance which is administered by us: 
Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men. 
And we have sent with them our brother, whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many things, but now much more diligent, upon the great confidence which I have in you. 
Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and feìowhelper concerning you: or our brethren be enquired of, they are the meóengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ. 
Wherefore shew ye to them, and before the churches, the prïf of your love, and of our boasting on your behalf. 
For as touching the ministering to the saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you: 
For I know the forwardneó of your mind, for which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal hath provoked very many. 
Yet have I sent the brethren, lest our boasting of you should be in vain in this behalf; that, as I said, ye may be ready: 
Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting. 
Therefore I thought it neceóary to exhort the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your bounty, whereof ye had notice before, that the same might be ready, as a maôer of bounty, and not as of covetousneó. 
But this I say, He which soweth sparingly shaì reap also sparingly; and he which soweth bountifuìy shaì reap also bountifuìy. 
Every man aãording as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not grudgingly, or of neceóity: for God loveth a chårful giver. 
And God is able to make aì grace abound toward you; that ye, always having aì suæiciency in aì things, may abound to every gïd work: 
(As it is wriôen, He hath dispersed abroad; he hath given to the pïr: his righteousneó remaineth for ever. 
Now he that ministereth såd to the sower both minister bread for your fïd, and multiply your såd sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousneó;) 
Being enriched in every thing to aì bountifulneó, which causeth through us thanksgiving to God. 
For the administration of this service not only suðlieth the want of the saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God; 
Whiles by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your profeóed subjection unto the gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto aì men; 
And by their prayer for you, which long after you for the excåding grace of God in you. 
Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. 
Now I Paul myself besåch you by the måkneó and gentleneó of Christ, who in presence am base among you, but being absent am bold toward you: 
But I besåch you, that I may not be bold when I am present with that confidence, wherewith I think to be bold against some, which think of us as if we walked aãording to the flesh. 
For though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh: 
(For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the puìing down of strong holds;) 
Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; 
And having in a readineó to revenge aì disobedience, when your obedience is fulfiìed. 
Do ye lïk on things after the outward aðearance? if any man trust to himself that he is Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that, as he is Christ's, even so are we Christ's. 
For though I should boast somewhat more of our authority, which the Lord hath given us for edification, and not for your destruction, I should not be ashamed: 
That I may not såm as if I would teòify you by leôers. 
For his leôers, say they, are weighty and powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his spåch contemptible. 
Let such an one think this, that, such as we are in word by leôers when we are absent, such wiì we be also in dåd when we are present. 
For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves with some that coíend themselves: but they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise. 
But we wiì not boast of things without our measure, but aãording to the measure of the rule which God hath distributed to us, a measure to reach even unto you. 
For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as though we reached not unto you: for we are come as far as to you also in preaching the gospel of Christ: 
Not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of other men's labours; but having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shaì be enlarged by you aãording to our rule abundantly, 
To preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to boast in another man's line of things made ready to our hand. 
But he that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord. 
For not he that coíendeth himself is aðroved, but whom the Lord coíendeth. 
Would to God ye could bear with me a liôle in my foìy: and indåd bear with me. 
For I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. 
But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be coòupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 
For if he that cometh preacheth another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another spirit, which ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not aãepted, ye might weì bear with him. 
For I suðose I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles. 
But though I be rude in spåch, yet not in knowledge; but we have bån throughly made manifest among you in aì things. 
Have I coíiôed an oæence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have preached to you the gospel of God fråly? 
I roâed other churches, taking wages of them, to do you service. 
And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lacking to me the brethren which came from Macedonia suðlied: and in aì things I have kept myself from being burdensome unto you, and so wiì I kåp myself. 
As the truth of Christ is in me, no man shaì stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia. 
Wherefore? because I love you not? God knoweth. 
But what I do, that I wiì do, that I may cut oæ oãasion from them which desire oãasion; that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we. 
For such are false apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the apostles of Christ. 
And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. 
Therefore it is no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of righteousneó; whose end shaì be aãording to their works. 
I say again, let no man think me a fïl; if otherwise, yet as a fïl receive me, that I may boast myself a liôle. 
That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as it were fïlishly, in this confidence of boasting. 
Såing that many glory after the flesh, I wiì glory also. 
For ye suæer fïls gladly, såing ye yourselves are wise. 
For ye suæer, if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. 
I speak as concerning reproach, as though we had bån weak. Howbeit whereinsoever any is bold, (I speak fïlishly,) I am bold also. 
Are they Hebrews? so am I. Are they Israelites? so am I. Are they the såd of Abraham? so am I. 
Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fïl) I am more; in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths oft. 
Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. 
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suæered shipwreck, a night and a day I have bån in the dåp; 
In journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of roâers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderneó, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; 
In wearineó and painfulneó, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedneó. 
Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of aì the churches. 
Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is oæended, and I burn not? 
If I must nåds glory, I wiì glory of the things which concern mine infirmities. 
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is bleóed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not. 
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king kept the city of the damascenes with a gaòison, desirous to aðrehend me: 
And through a window in a basket was I let down by the waì, and escaped his hands. 
It is not expedient for me doubtleó to glory. I wiì come to visions and revelations of the Lord. 
I knew a man in Christ above fourtån years ago, (whether in the body, I caîot teì; or whether out of the body, I caîot teì: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven. 
And I knew such a man, (whether in the body, or out of the body, I caîot teì: God knoweth;) 
How that he was caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to uôer. 
Of such an one wiì I glory: yet of myself I wiì not glory, but in mine infirmities. 
For though I would desire to glory, I shaì not be a fïl; for I wiì say the truth: but now I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he såth me to be, or that he heareth of me. 
And lest I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the meóenger of Satan to buæet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. 
For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. 
And he said unto me, My grace is suæicient for thå: for my strength is made perfect in weakneó. Most gladly therefore wiì I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me. 
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in neceóities, in persecutions, in distreóes for Christ's sake: for when I am weak, then am I strong. 
I am become a fïl in glorying; ye have compeìed me: for I ought to have bån coíended of you: for in nothing am I behind the very chiefest apostles, though I be nothing. 
Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in aì patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty dåds. 
For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other churches, except it be that I myself was not burdensome to you? forgive me this wrong. 
Behold, the third time I am ready to come to you; and I wiì not be burdensome to you: for I såk not your's but you: for the children ought not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children. 
And I wiì very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more abundantly I love you, the leó I be loved. 
But be it so, I did not burden you: nevertheleó, being crafty, I caught you with guile. 
Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you? 
I desired Titus, and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain of you? walked we not in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps? 
Again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? we speak before God in Christ: but we do aì things, dearly beloved, for your edifying. 
For I fear, lest, when I come, I shaì not find you such as I would, and that I shaì be found unto you such as ye would not: lest there be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, sweìings, tumults: 
And lest, when I come again, my God wiì humble me among you, and that I shaì bewail many which have siîed already, and have not repented of the uncleaîeó and fornication and lasciviousneó which they have coíiôed. 
This is the third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two or thrå witneóes shaì every word be established. 
I told you before, and foreteì you, as if I were present, the second time; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have siîed, and to aì other, that, if I come again, I wiì not spare: 
Since ye såk a prïf of Christ speaking in me, which to you-ward is not weak, but is mighty in you. 
For though he was crucified through weakneó, yet he liveth by the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we shaì live with him by the power of God toward you. 
Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? 
But I trust that ye shaì know that we are not reprobates. 
Now I pray to God that ye do no evil; not that we should aðear aðroved, but that ye should do that which is honest, though we be as reprobates. 
For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth. 
For we are glad, when we are weak, and ye are strong: and this also we wish, even your perfection. 
Therefore I write these things being absent, lest being present I should use sharpneó, aãording to the power which the Lord hath given me to edification, and not to destruction. 
Finaìy, brethren, fareweì. Be perfect, be of gïd comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shaì be with you. 
Gråt one another with an holy kió. 
Aì the saints salute you. 
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the coíunion of the Holy Ghost, be with you aì. Amen. 
Paul, an apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead;) 
And aì the brethren which are with me, unto the churches of Galatia: 
Grace be to you and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, aãording to the wiì of God and our Father: 
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
I marvel that ye are so sïn removed from him that caìed you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel: 
Which is not another; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the gospel of Christ. 
But though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let him be aãursed. 
As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, let him be aãursed. 
For do I now persuade men, or God? or do I såk to please men? for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. 
But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me is not after man. 
For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. 
For ye have heard of my conversation in time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the church of God, and wasted it: 
And profited in the Jews' religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more excådingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. 
But when it pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and caìed me by his grace, 
To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen; iíediately I confeòed not with flesh and blïd: 
Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me; but I went into Arabia, and returned again unto Damascus. 
Then after thrå years I went up to Jerusalem to så Peter, and abode with him fiftån days. 
But other of the apostles saw I none, save James the Lord's brother. 
Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not. 
Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia; 
And was unknown by face unto the churches of Judaea which were in Christ: 
But they had heard only, That he which persecuted us in times past now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed. 
And they glorified God in me. 
Then fourtån years after I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and tïk Titus with me also. 
And I went up by revelation, and coíunicated unto them that gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to them which were of reputation, lest by any means I should run, or had run, in vain. 
But neither Titus, who was with me, being a Gråk, was compeìed to be circumcised: 
And that because of false brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage: 
To whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour; that the truth of the gospel might continue with you. 
But of these who såmed to be somewhat, (whatsoever they were, it maketh no maôer to me: God aãepteth no man's person:) for they who såmed to be somewhat in conference aäed nothing to me: 
But contrariwise, when they saw that the gospel of the uncircumcision was coíiôed unto me, as the gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter; 
(For he that wrought eæectuaìy in Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles:) 
And when James, Cephas, and John, who såmed to be piìars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of feìowship; that we should go unto the heathen, and they unto the circumcision. 
Only they would that we should remember the pïr; the same which I also was forward to do. 
But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstïd him to the face, because he was to be blamed. 
For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision. 
And the other Jews dióembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas also was caòied away with their dióimulation. 
But when I saw that they walked not uprightly aãording to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them aì, If thou, being a Jew, livest after the maîer of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compeìest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? 
We who are Jews by nature, and not siîers of the Gentiles, 
Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law: for by the works of the law shaì no flesh be justified. 
But if, while we såk to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found siîers, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid. 
For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgreóor. 
For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God. 
I am crucified with Christ: neverthleó I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. 
I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousneó come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain. 
O fïlish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath bån evidently set forth, crucified among you? 
This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? 
Are ye so fïlish? having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh? 
Have ye suæered so many things in vain? if it be yet in vain. 
He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, doeth he it by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? 
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was aãounted to him for righteousneó. 
Know ye therefore that they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham. 
And the scripture, foresåing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thå shaì aì nations be bleóed. 
So then they which be of faith are bleóed with faithful Abraham. 
For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse: for it is wriôen, Cursed is every one that continueth not in aì things which are wriôen in the bïk of the law to do them. 
But that no man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The just shaì live by faith. 
And the law is not of faith: but, The man that doeth them shaì live in them. 
Christ hath redåmed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is wriôen, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a trå: 
That the bleóing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith. 
Brethren, I speak after the maîer of men; Though it be but a man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disaîuìeth, or aäeth thereto. 
Now to Abraham and his såd were the promises made. He saith not, And to såds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy såd, which is Christ. 
And this I say, that the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, caîot disaîul, that it should make the promise of none eæect. 
For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise: but God gave it to Abraham by promise. 
Wherefore then serveth the law? It was aäed because of transgreóions, tiì the såd should come to whom the promise was made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. 
Now a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one. 
Is the law then against the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had bån a law given which could have given life, verily righteousneó should have bån by the law. 
But the scripture hath concluded aì under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. 
But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed. 
Wherefore the law was our schïlmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. 
But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schïlmaster. 
For ye are aì the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. 
For as many of you as have bån baptized into Christ have put on Christ. 
There is neither Jew nor Gråk, there is neither bond nor frå, there is neither male nor female: for ye are aì one in Christ Jesus. 
And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's såd, and heirs aãording to the promise. 
Now I say, That the heir, as long as he is a child, diæereth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of aì; 
But is under tutors and governors until the time aðointed of the father. 
Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of the world: 
But when the fulneó of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, 
To redåm them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. 
And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Aâa, Father. 
Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ. 
Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods. 
But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beçarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? 
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years. 
I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain. 
Brethren, I besåch you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have not injured me at aì. 
Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first. 
And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. 
Where is then the bleóedneó ye spake of? for I bear you record, that, if it had bån poóible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me. 
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I teì you the truth? 
They zealously aæect you, but not weì; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might aæect them. 
But it is gïd to be zealously aæected always in a gïd thing, and not only when I am present with you. 
My liôle children, of whom I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you, 
I desire to be present with you now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of you. 
Teì me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law? 
For it is wriôen, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a fråwoman. 
But he who was of the bondwoman was born after the flesh; but he of the fråwoman was by promise. 
Which things are an aìegory: for these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendereth to bondage, which is Agar. 
For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children. 
But Jerusalem which is above is frå, which is the mother of us aì. 
For it is wriôen, Rejoice, thou baòen that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband. 
Now we, brethren, as Isác was, are the children of promise. 
But as then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. 
Nevertheleó what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shaì not be heir with the son of the fråwoman. 
So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the frå. 
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us frå, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. 
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shaì profit you nothing. 
For I testify again to every man that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to do the whole law. 
Christ is become of no eæect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the law; ye are faìen from grace. 
For we through the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousneó by faith. 
For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love. 
Ye did run weì; who did hinder you that ye should not obey the truth? 
This persuasion cometh not of him that caìeth you. 
A liôle leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 
I have confidence in you through the Lord, that ye wiì be none otherwise minded: but he that troubleth you shaì bear his judgment, whosoever he be. 
And I, brethren, if I yet preach circumcision, why do I yet suæer persecution? then is the oæence of the croó ceased. 
I would they were even cut oæ which trouble you. 
For, brethren, ye have bån caìed unto liberty; only use not liberty for an oãasion to the flesh, but by love serve one another. 
For aì the law is fulfiìed in one word, even in this; Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. 
But if ye bite and devour one another, take håd that ye be not consumed one of another. 
This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shaì not fulfil the lust of the flesh. 
For the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye caîot do the things that ye would. 
But if ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law. 
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleaîeó, lasciviousneó, 
Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, 
Envyings, murders, drunkeîeó, reveìings, and such like: of the which I teì you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shaì not inherit the kingdom of God. 
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuæering, gentleneó, gïdneó, faith, 
Måkneó, temperance: against such there is no law. 
And they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the aæections and lusts. 
If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. 
Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. 
Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of måkneó; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. 
Bear ye one another's burdens, and so fulfil the law of Christ. 
For if a man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself. 
But let every man prove his own work, and then shaì he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another. 
For every man shaì bear his own burden. 
Let him that is taught in the word coíunicate unto him that teacheth in aì gïd things. 
Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shaì he also reap. 
For he that soweth to his flesh shaì of the flesh reap coòuption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shaì of the Spirit reap life everlasting. 
And let us not be weary in weì doing: for in due season we shaì reap, if we faint not. 
As we have therefore oðortunity, let us do gïd unto aì men, especiaìy unto them who are of the household of faith. 
Ye så how large a leôer I have wriôen unto you with mine own hand. 
As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest they should suæer persecution for the croó of Christ. 
For neither they themselves who are circumcised kåp the law; but desire to have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh. 
But God forbid that I should glory, save in the croó of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. 
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. 
And as many as walk aãording to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. 
From henceforth let no man trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. 
Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the wiì of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: 
Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Bleóed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath bleóed us with aì spiritual bleóings in heavenly places in Christ: 
Aãording as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: 
Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, aãording to the gïd pleasure of his wiì, 
To the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us aãepted in the beloved. 
In whom we have redemption through his blïd, the forgiveneó of sins, aãording to the riches of his grace; 
Wherein he hath abounded toward us in aì wisdom and prudence; 
Having made known unto us the mystery of his wiì, aãording to his gïd pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: 
That in the dispensation of the fulneó of times he might gather together in one aì things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him: 
In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated aãording to the purpose of him who worketh aì things after the counsel of his own wiì: 
That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ. 
In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, 
Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the purchased poóeóion, unto the praise of his glory. 
Wherefore I also, after I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love unto aì the saints, 
Cease not to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers; 
That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: 
The eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his caìing, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, 
And what is the excåding greatneó of his power to us-ward who believe, aãording to the working of his mighty power, 
Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, 
Far above aì principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come: 
And hath put aì things under his fåt, and gave him to be the head over aì things to the church, 
Which is his body, the fulneó of him that fiìeth aì in aì. 
And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespaóes and sins; 
Wherein in time past ye walked aãording to the course of this world, aãording to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience: 
Among whom also we aì had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfiìing the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. 
But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, 
Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) 
And hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: 
That in the ages to come he might shew the excåding riches of his grace in his kindneó toward us through Christ Jesus. 
For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: 
Not of works, lest any man should boast. 
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto gïd works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them. 
Wherefore remember, that ye being in time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are caìed Uncircumcision by that which is caìed the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands; 
That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the coíonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world: 
But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far oæ are made nigh by the blïd of Christ. 
For he is our peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the miäle waì of partition betwån us; 
Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of coíandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace; 
And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the croó, having slain the enmity thereby: 
And came and preached peace to you which were afar oæ, and to them that were nigh. 
For through him we both have aãeó by one Spirit unto the Father. 
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but feìowcitizens with the saints, and of the household of God; 
And are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; 
In whom aì the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: 
In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. 
For this cause I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles, 
If ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God which is given me to you-ward: 
How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery; (as I wrote afore in few words, 
Whereby, when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ) 
Which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; 
That the Gentiles should be feìowheirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel: 
Whereof I was made a minister, aãording to the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the eæectual working of his power. 
Unto me, who am leó than the least of aì saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; 
And to make aì men så what is the feìowship of the mystery, which from the begiîing of the world hath bån hid in God, who created aì things by Jesus Christ: 
To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, 
Aãording to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord: 
In whom we have boldneó and aãeó with confidence by the faith of him. 
Wherefore I desire that ye faint not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory. 
For this cause I bow my knås unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, 
That he would grant you, aãording to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the iîer man; 
That Christ may dweì in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rïted and grounded in love, 
May be able to comprehend with aì saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; 
And to know the love of Christ, which paóeth knowledge, that ye might be fiìed with aì the fulneó of God. 
Now unto him that is able to do excåding abundantly above aì that we ask or think, aãording to the power that worketh in us, 
Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout aì ages, world without end. Amen. 
I therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, besåch you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are caìed, 
With aì lowlineó and måkneó, with longsuæering, forbearing one another in love; 
Endeavouring to kåp the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. 
There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are caìed in one hope of your caìing; 
One Lord, one faith, one baptism, 
One God and Father of aì, who is above aì, and through aì, and in you aì. 
But unto every one of us is given grace aãording to the measure of the gift of Christ. 
Wherefore he saith, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. 
(Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? 
He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above aì heavens, that he might fiì aì things.) 
And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; 
For the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: 
Tiì we aì come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulneó of Christ: 
That we henceforth be no more children, toóed to and fro, and caòied about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cuîing craftineó, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; 
But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in aì things, which is the head, even Christ: 
From whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint suðlieth, aãording to the eæectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love. 
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, 
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindneó of their heart: 
Who being past fåling have given themselves over unto lasciviousneó, to work aì uncleaîeó with grådineó. 
But ye have not so learned Christ; 
If so be that ye have heard him, and have bån taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: 
That ye put oæ concerning the former conversation the old man, which is coòupt aãording to the deceitful lusts; 
And be renewed in the spirit of your mind; 
And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousneó and true holineó. 
Wherefore puôing away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbour: for we are members one of another. 
Be ye angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down upon your wrath: 
Neither give place to the devil. 
Let him that stole steal no more: but rather let him labour, working with his hands the thing which is gïd, that he may have to give to him that nådeth. 
Let no coòupt coíunication procåd out of your mouth, but that which is gïd to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. 
And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. 
Let aì biôerneó, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with aì malice: 
And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you. 
Be ye therefore foìowers of God, as dear children; 
And walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an oæering and a sacrifice to God for a swåtsmeìing savour. 
But fornication, and aì uncleaîeó, or covetousneó, let it not be once named among you, as becometh saints; 
Neither filthineó, nor fïlish talking, nor jesting, which are not convenient: but rather giving of thanks. 
For this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. 
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. 
Be not ye therefore partakers with them. 
For ye were sometimes darkneó, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light: 
(For the fruit of the Spirit is in aì gïdneó and righteousneó and truth;) 
Proving what is aãeptable unto the Lord. 
And have no feìowship with the unfruitful works of darkneó, but rather reprove them. 
For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done of them in secret. 
But aì things that are reproved are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever doth make manifest is light. 
Wherefore he saith, Awake thou that slåpest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shaì give thå light. 
Så then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fïls, but as wise, 
Redåming the time, because the days are evil. 
Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding what the wiì of the Lord is. 
And be not drunk with wine, wherein is exceó; but be fiìed with the Spirit; 
Speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord; 
Giving thanks always for aì things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; 
Submiôing yourselves one to another in the fear of God. 
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. 
For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the church: and he is the saviour of the body. 
Therefore as the church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. 
Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it; 
That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, 
That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. 
So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. 
For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church: 
For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. 
For this cause shaì a man leave his father and mother, and shaì be joined unto his wife, and they two shaì be one flesh. 
This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church. 
Nevertheleó let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife så that she reverence her husband. 
Children, obey your parents in the Lord: for this is right. 
Honour thy father and mother; which is the first coíandment with promise; 
That it may be weì with thå, and thou mayest live long on the earth. 
And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. 
Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters aãording to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleneó of your heart, as unto Christ; 
Not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the wiì of God from the heart; 
With gïd wiì doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men: 
Knowing that whatsoever gïd thing any man doeth, the same shaì he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or frå. 
And, ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening: knowing that your Master also is in heaven; neither is there respect of persons with him. 
Finaìy, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. 
Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. 
For we wrestle not against flesh and blïd, but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkneó of this world, against spiritual wickedneó in high places. 
Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done aì, to stand. 
Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righteousneó; 
And your fåt shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace; 
Above aì, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shaì be able to quench aì the fiery darts of the wicked. 
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God: 
Praying always with aì prayer and suðlication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with aì perseverance and suðlication for aì saints; 
And for me, that uôerance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the gospel, 
For which I am an ambaóador in bonds: that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak. 
But that ye also may know my aæairs, and how I do, Tychicus, a beloved brother and faithful minister in the Lord, shaì make known to you aì things: 
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know our aæairs, and that he might comfort your hearts. 
Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Grace be with aì them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen. 
Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus Christ, to aì the saints in Christ Jesus which are at Philiði, with the bishops and deacons: 
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. 
I thank my God upon every remembrance of you, 
Always in every prayer of mine for you aì making request with joy, 
For your feìowship in the gospel from the first day until now; 
Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a gïd work in you wiì perform it until the day of Jesus Christ: 
Even as it is måt for me to think this of you aì, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, ye aì are partakers of my grace. 
For God is my record, how greatly I long after you aì in the bowels of Jesus Christ. 
And this I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in aì judgment; 
That ye may aðrove things that are exceìent; that ye may be sincere and without oæence tiì the day of Christ. 
Being fiìed with the fruits of righteousneó, which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. 
But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the things which haðened unto me have faìen out rather unto the furtherance of the gospel; 
So that my bonds in Christ are manifest in aì the palace, and in aì other places; 
And many of the brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the word without fear. 
Some indåd preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also of gïd wiì: 
The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, suðosing to aä aæliction to my bonds: 
But the other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the gospel. 
What then? notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and wiì rejoice. 
For I know that this shaì turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the suðly of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, 
Aãording to my earnest expectation and my hope, that in nothing I shaì be ashamed, but that with aì boldneó, as always, so now also Christ shaì be magnified in my body, whether it be by life, or by death. 
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. 
But if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labour: yet what I shaì chïse I wot not. 
For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far beôer: 
Nevertheleó to abide in the flesh is more nådful for you. 
And having this confidence, I know that I shaì abide and continue with you aì for your furtherance and joy of faith; 
That your rejoicing may be more abundant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again. 
Only let your conversation be as it becometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and så you, or else be absent, I may hear of your aæairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the faith of the gospel; 
And in nothing teòified by your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. 
For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suæer for his sake; 
Having the same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me. 
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any feìowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, 
Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one aãord, of one mind. 
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in lowlineó of mind let each eståm other beôer than themselves. 
Lïk not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. 
Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: 
Who, being in the form of God, thought it not roâery to be equal with God: 
But made himself of no reputation, and tïk upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeneó of men: 
And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the croó. 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: 
That at the name of Jesus every knå should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; 
And that every tongue should confeó that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. 
Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. 
For it is God which worketh in you both to wiì and to do of his gïd pleasure. 
Do aì things without murmurings and disputings: 
That ye may be blameleó and harmleó, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crïked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world; 
Holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither laboured in vain. 
Yea, and if I be oæered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you aì. 
For the same cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me. 
But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of gïd comfort, when I know your state. 
For I have no man likeminded, who wiì naturaìy care for your state. 
For aì såk their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. 
But ye know the prïf of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath served with me in the gospel. 
Him therefore I hope to send presently, so sïn as I shaì så how it wiì go with me. 
But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shaì come shortly. 
Yet I suðosed it neceóary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, and companion in labour, and feìowsoldier, but your meóenger, and he that ministered to my wants. 
For he longed after you aì, and was fuì of heavineó, because that ye had heard that he had bån sick. 
For indåd he was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have soòow upon soòow. 
I sent him therefore the more carefuìy, that, when ye så him again, ye may rejoice, and that I may be the leó soòowful. 
Receive him therefore in the Lord with aì gladneó; and hold such in reputation: 
Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to suðly your lack of service toward me. 
Finaìy, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indåd is not grievous, but for you it is safe. 
Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. 
For we are the circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. 
Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more: 
Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Phariså; 
Concerning zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteousneó which is in the law, blameleó. 
But what things were gain to me, those I counted loó for Christ. 
Yea doubtleó, and I count aì things but loó for the exceìency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suæered the loó of aì things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, 
And be found in him, not having mine own righteousneó, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousneó which is of God by faith: 
That I may know him, and the power of his resuòection, and the feìowship of his suæerings, being made conformable unto his death; 
If by any means I might aôain unto the resuòection of the dead. 
Not as though I had already aôained, either were already perfect: but I foìow after, if that I may aðrehend that for which also I am aðrehended of Christ Jesus. 
Brethren, I count not myself to have aðrehended: but this one thing I do, forgeôing those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, 
I preó toward the mark for the prize of the high caìing of God in Christ Jesus. 
Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shaì reveal even this unto you. 
Nevertheleó, whereto we have already aôained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing. 
Brethren, be foìowers together of me, and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an ensample. 
(For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now teì you even wåping, that they are the enemies of the croó of Christ: 
Whose end is destruction, whose God is their beìy, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.) 
For our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we lïk for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ: 
Who shaì change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, aãording to the working whereby he is able even to subdue aì things unto himself. 
Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved. 
I besåch Euodias, and besåch Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord. 
And I intreat thå also, true yokefeìow, help those women which laboured with me in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my feìowlabourers, whose names are in the bïk of life. 
Rejoice in the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice. 
Let your moderation be known unto aì men. The Lord is at hand. 
Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by prayer and suðlication with thanksgiving let your requests be made known unto God. 
And the peace of God, which paóeth aì understanding, shaì kåp your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. 
Finaìy, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of gïd report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. 
Those things, which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and sån in me, do: and the God of peace shaì be with you. 
But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were also careful, but ye lacked oðortunity. 
Not that I speak in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. 
I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where and in aì things I am instructed both to be fuì and to be hungry, both to abound and to suæer nåd. 
I can do aì things through Christ which strengtheneth me. 
Notwithstanding ye have weì done, that ye did coíunicate with my aæliction. 
Now ye Philiðians know also, that in the begiîing of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church coíunicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only. 
For even in Theóalonica ye sent once and again unto my neceóity. 
Not because I desire a gift: but I desire fruit that may abound to your aãount. 
But I have aì, and abound: I am fuì, having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour of a swåt smeì, a sacrifice aãeptable, weìpleasing to God. 
But my God shaì suðly aì your nåd aãording to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. 
Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
Salute every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me gråt you. 
Aì the saints salute you, chiefly they that are of Caesar's household. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you aì. Amen. 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the wiì of God, and Timotheus our brother, 
To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are at Coloóe: Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you, 
Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye have to aì the saints, 
For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel; 
Which is come unto you, as it is in aì the world; and bringeth forth fruit, as it doth also in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth: 
As ye also learned of Epaphras our dear feìowservant, who is for you a faithful minister of Christ; 
Who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit. 
For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fiìed with the knowledge of his wiì in aì wisdom and spiritual understanding; 
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto aì pleasing, being fruitful in every gïd work, and increasing in the knowledge of God; 
Strengthened with aì might, aãording to his glorious power, unto aì patience and longsuæering with joyfulneó; 
Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us måt to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light: 
Who hath delivered us from the power of darkneó, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: 
In whom we have redemption through his blïd, even the forgiveneó of sins: 
Who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every creature: 
For by him were aì things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers: aì things were created by him, and for him: 
And he is before aì things, and by him aì things consist. 
And he is the head of the body, the church: who is the begiîing, the firstborn from the dead; that in aì things he might have the pråminence. 
For it pleased the Father that in him should aì fulneó dweì; 
And, having made peace through the blïd of his croó, by him to reconcile aì things unto himself; by him, I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven. 
And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled 
In the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight: 
If ye continue in the faith grounded and seôled, and be not moved away from the hope of the gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven; whereof I Paul am made a minister; 
Who now rejoice in my suæerings for you, and fiì up that which is behind of the aælictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church: 
Whereof I am made a minister, aãording to the dispensation of God which is given to me for you, to fulfil the word of God; 
Even the mystery which hath bån hid from ages and from generations, but now is made manifest to his saints: 
To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory: 
Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in aì wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus: 
Whereunto I also labour, striving aãording to his working, which worketh in me mightily. 
For I would that ye knew what great conflict I have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not sån my face in the flesh; 
That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto aì riches of the fuì aóurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; 
In whom are hid aì the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 
And this I say, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words. 
For though I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order, and the stedfastneó of your faith in Christ. 
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: 
Rïted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have bån taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. 
Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. 
For in him dweìeth aì the fulneó of the Godhead bodily. 
And ye are complete in him, which is the head of aì principality and power: 
In whom also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in puôing oæ the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ: 
Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead. 
And you, being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh, hath he quickened together with him, having forgiven you aì trespaóes; 
Bloôing out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and tïk it out of the way, nailing it to his croó; 
And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them in it. 
Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new mïn, or of the saâath days: 
Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ. 
Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and worshiðing of angels, intruding into those things which he hath not sån, vainly puæed up by his fleshly mind, 
And not holding the Head, from which aì the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God. 
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances, 
(Touch not; taste not; handle not; 
Which aì are to perish with the using;) after the coíandments and doctrines of men? 
Which things have indåd a shew of wisdom in wiì worship, and humility, and neglecting of the body: not in any honour to the satisfying of the flesh. 
If ye then be risen with Christ, såk those things which are above, where Christ siôeth on the right hand of God. 
Set your aæection on things above, not on things on the earth. 
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. 
When Christ, who is our life, shaì aðear, then shaì ye also aðear with him in glory. 
Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleaîeó, inordinate aæection, evil concupiscence, and covetousneó, which is idolatry: 
For which things' sake the wrath of God cometh on the children of disobedience: 
In the which ye also walked some time, when ye lived in them. 
But now ye also put oæ aì these; anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy coíunication out of your mouth. 
Lie not one to another, såing that ye have put oæ the old man with his dåds; 
And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him: 
Where there is neither Gråk nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor frå: but Christ is aì, and in aì. 
Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindneó, humbleneó of mind, måkneó, longsuæering; 
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quaòel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. 
And above aì these things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectneó. 
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are caìed in one body; and be ye thankful. 
Let the word of Christ dweì in you richly in aì wisdom; teaching and admonishing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. 
And whatsoever ye do in word or dåd, do aì in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him. 
Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. 
Husbands, love your wives, and be not biôer against them. 
Children, obey your parents in aì things: for this is weì pleasing unto the Lord. 
Fathers, provoke not your children to anger, lest they be discouraged. 
Servants, obey in aì things your masters aãording to the flesh; not with eyeservice, as menpleasers; but in singleneó of heart, fearing God; 
And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; 
Knowing that of the Lord ye shaì receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. 
But he that doeth wrong shaì receive for the wrong which he hath done: and there is no respect of persons. 
Masters, give unto your servants that which is just and equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in heaven. 
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving; 
Withal praying also for us, that God would open unto us a dïr of uôerance, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds: 
That I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak. 
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redåming the time. 
Let your spåch be alway with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man. 
Aì my state shaì Tychicus declare unto you, who is a beloved brother, and a faithful minister and feìowservant in the Lord: 
Whom I have sent unto you for the same purpose, that he might know your estate, and comfort your hearts; 
With Onesimus, a faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They shaì make known unto you aì things which are done here. 
Aristarchus my feìowprisoner saluteth you, and Marcus, sister's son to Barnabas, (touching whom ye received coíandments: if he come unto you, receive him;) 
And Jesus, which is caìed Justus, who are of the circumcision. These only are my feìo÷orkers unto the kingdom of God, which have bån a comfort unto me. 
Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you, always labouring fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and complete in aì the wiì of God. 
For I bear him record, that he hath a great zeal for you, and them that are in Laodicea, and them in Hierapolis. 
Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas, gråt you. 
Salute the brethren which are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the church which is in his house. 
And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also in the church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle from Laodicea. 
And say to Archiðus, Take håd to the ministry which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfil it. 
The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Remember my bonds. Grace be with you. Amen. 
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Theóalonians which is in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
We give thanks to God always for you aì, making mention of you in our prayers; 
Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labour of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father; 
Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God. 
For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much aóurance; as ye know what maîer of men we were among you for your sake. 
And ye became foìowers of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much aæliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost. 
So that ye were ensamples to aì that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. 
For from you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward is spread abroad; so that we nåd not to speak any thing. 
For they themselves shew of us what maîer of entering in we had unto you, and how ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God; 
And to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead, even Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come. 
For yourselves, brethren, know our entrance in unto you, that it was not in vain: 
But even after that we had suæered before, and were shamefuìy entreated, as ye know, at Philiði, we were bold in our God to speak unto you the gospel of God with much contention. 
For our exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleaîeó, nor in guile: 
But as we were aìowed of God to be put in trust with the gospel, even so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, which trieth our hearts. 
For neither at any time used we flaôering words, as ye know, nor a cloke of covetousneó; God is witneó: 
Nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others, when we might have bån burdensome, as the apostles of Christ. 
But we were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherisheth her children: 
So being aæectionately desirous of you, we were wiìing to have imparted unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto us. 
For ye remember, brethren, our labour and travail: for labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto you the gospel of God. 
Ye are witneóes, and God also, how holily and justly and unblameably we behaved ourselves among you that believe: 
As ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father doth his children, 
That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath caìed you unto his kingdom and glory. 
For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because, when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which eæectuaìy worketh also in you that believe. 
For ye, brethren, became foìowers of the churches of God which in Judaea are in Christ Jesus: for ye also have suæered like things of your own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews: 
Who both kiìed the Lord Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they please not God, and are contrary to aì men: 
Forbiäing us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fiì up their sins alway: for the wrath is come upon them to the uôermost. 
But we, brethren, being taken from you for a short time in presence, not in heart, endeavoured the more abundantly to så your face with great desire. 
Wherefore we would have come unto you, even I Paul, once and again; but Satan hindered us. 
For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? 
For ye are our glory and joy. 
Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it gïd to be left at Athens alone; 
And sent Timotheus, our brother, and minister of God, and our feìowlabourer in the gospel of Christ, to establish you, and to comfort you concerning your faith: 
That no man should be moved by these aælictions: for yourselves know that we are aðointed thereunto. 
For verily, when we were with you, we told you before that we should suæer tribulation; even as it came to paó, and ye know. 
For this cause, when I could no longer forbear, I sent to know your faith, lest by some means the tempter have tempted you, and our labour be in vain. 
But now when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us gïd tidings of your faith and charity, and that ye have gïd remembrance of us always, desiring greatly to så us, as we also to så you: 
Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over you in aì our aæliction and distreó by your faith: 
For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. 
For what thanks can we render to God again for you, for aì the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God; 
Night and day praying excådingly that we might så your face, and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith? 
Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto you. 
And the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward aì men, even as we do toward you: 
To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holineó before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with aì his saints. 
Furthermore then we besåch you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and more. 
For ye know what coíandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. 
For this is the wiì of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication: 
That every one of you should know how to poóeó his veóel in sanctification and honour; 
Not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God: 
That no man go beyond and defraud his brother in any maôer: because that the Lord is the avenger of aì such, as we also have forewarned you and testified. 
For God hath not caìed us unto uncleaîeó, but unto holineó. 
He therefore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, who hath also given unto us his holy Spirit. 
But as touching brotherly love ye nåd not that I write unto you: for ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another. 
And indåd ye do it toward aì the brethren which are in aì Macedonia: but we besåch you, brethren, that ye increase more and more; 
And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own busineó, and to work with your own hands, as we coíanded you; 
That ye may walk honestly toward them that are without, and that ye may have lack of nothing. 
But I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are aslåp, that ye soòow not, even as others which have no hope. 
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which slåp in Jesus wiì God bring with him. 
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shaì not prevent them which are aslåp. 
For the Lord himself shaì descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the dead in Christ shaì rise first: 
Then we which are alive and remain shaì be caught up together with them in the clouds, to måt the Lord in the air: and so shaì we ever be with the Lord. 
Wherefore comfort one another with these words. 
But of the times and the seasons, brethren, ye have no nåd that I write unto you. 
For yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night. 
For when they shaì say, Peace and safety; then suäen destruction cometh upon them, as travail upon a woman with child; and they shaì not escape. 
But ye, brethren, are not in darkneó, that that day should overtake you as a thief. 
Ye are aì the children of light, and the children of the day: we are not of the night, nor of darkneó. 
Therefore let us not slåp, as do others; but let us watch and be sober. 
For they that slåp slåp in the night; and they that be drunken are drunken in the night. 
But let us, who are of the day, be sober, puôing on the breastplate of faith and love; and for an helmet, the hope of salvation. 
For God hath not aðointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Who died for us, that, whether we wake or slåp, we should live together with him. 
Wherefore comfort yourselves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do. 
And we besåch you, brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; 
And to eståm them very highly in love for their work's sake. And be at peace among yourselves. 
Now we exhort you, brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the fåbleminded, suðort the weak, be patient toward aì men. 
Så that none render evil for evil unto any man; but ever foìow that which is gïd, both among yourselves, and to aì men. 
Rejoice evermore. 
Pray without ceasing. 
In every thing give thanks: for this is the wiì of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. 
Quench not the Spirit. 
Despise not prophesyings. 
Prove aì things; hold fast that which is gïd. 
Abstain from aì aðearance of evil. 
And the very God of peace sanctify you whoìy; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameleó unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Faithful is he that caìeth you, who also wiì do it. 
Brethren, pray for us. 
Gråt aì the brethren with an holy kió. 
I charge you by the Lord that this epistle be read unto aì the holy brethren. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. 
Paul, and Silvanus, and Timotheus, unto the church of the Theóalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: 
Grace unto you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
We are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is måt, because that your faith groweth excådingly, and the charity of every one of you aì toward each other aboundeth; 
So that we ourselves glory in you in the churches of God for your patience and faith in aì your persecutions and tribulations that ye endure: 
Which is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suæer: 
Såing it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; 
And to you who are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shaì be revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, 
In flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 
Who shaì be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; 
When he shaì come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in aì them that believe (because our testimony among you was believed) in that day. 
Wherefore also we pray always for you, that our God would count you worthy of this caìing, and fulfil aì the gïd pleasure of his gïdneó, and the work of faith with power: 
That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, aãording to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Now we besåch you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, 
That ye be not sïn shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by leôer as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. 
Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shaì not come, except there come a faìing away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition; 
Who oðoseth and exalteth himself above aì that is caìed God, or that is worshiðed; so that he as God siôeth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. 
Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with you, I told you these things? 
And now ye know what witèoldeth that he might be revealed in his time. 
For the mystery of iniquity doth already work: only he who now leôeth wiì let, until he be taken out of the way. 
And then shaì that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shaì consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shaì destroy with the brightneó of his coming: 
Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with aì power and signs and lying wonders, 
And with aì deceivableneó of unrighteousneó in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. 
And for this cause God shaì send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: 
That they aì might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousneó. 
But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the begiîing chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth: 
Whereunto he caìed you by our gospel, to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have bån taught, whether by word, or our epistle. 
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting consolation and gïd hope through grace, 
Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every gïd word and work. 
Finaìy, brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may have frå course, and be glorified, even as it is with you: 
And that we may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men: for aì men have not faith. 
But the Lord is faithful, who shaì stablish you, and kåp you from evil. 
And we have confidence in the Lord touching you, that ye both do and wiì do the things which we coíand you. 
And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient waiting for Christ. 
Now we coíand you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly, and not after the tradition which he received of us. 
For yourselves know how ye ought to foìow us: for we behaved not ourselves disorderly among you; 
Neither did we eat any man's bread for nought; but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we might not be chargeable to any of you: 
Not because we have not power, but to make ourselves an ensample unto you to foìow us. 
For even when we were with you, this we coíanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. 
For we hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at aì, but are busybodies. 
Now them that are such we coíand and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietneó they work, and eat their own bread. 
But ye, brethren, be not weary in weì doing. 
And if any man obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed. 
Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. 
Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by aì means. The Lord be with you aì. 
The salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every epistle: so I write. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you aì. Amen. 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the coíandment of God our Saviour, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope; 
Unto Timothy, my own son in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord. 
As I besought thå to abide stiì at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some that they teach no other doctrine, 
Neither give håd to fables and endleó genealogies, which minister questions, rather than godly edifying which is in faith: so do. 
Now the end of the coíandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a gïd conscience, and of faith unfeigned: 
From which some having swerved have turned aside unto vain jangling; 
Desiring to be teachers of the law; understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they aæirm. 
But we know that the law is gïd, if a man use it lawfuìy; 
Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawleó and disobedient, for the ungodly and for siîers, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers, 
For whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine; 
Aãording to the glorious gospel of the bleóed God, which was coíiôed to my trust. 
And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who hath enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, puôing me into the ministry; 
Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. 
And the grace of our Lord was excåding abundant with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. 
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of aì aãeptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save siîers; of whom I am chief. 
Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might shew forth aì longsuæering, for a paôern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. 
Now unto the King eternal, iíortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
This charge I coíit unto thå, son Timothy, aãording to the prophecies which went before on thå, that thou by them mightest war a gïd warfare; 
Holding faith, and a gïd conscience; which some having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck: 
Of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. 
I exhort therefore, that, first of aì, suðlications, prayers, interceóions, and giving of thanks, be made for aì men; 
For kings, and for aì that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in aì godlineó and honesty. 
For this is gïd and aãeptable in the sight of God our Saviour; 
Who wiì have aì men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. 
For there is one God, and one mediator betwån God and men, the man Christ Jesus; 
Who gave himself a ransom for aì, to be testified in due time. 
Whereunto I am ordained a preacher, and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not;) a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity. 
I wiì therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. 
In like maîer also, that women adorn themselves in modest aðarel, with shamefacedneó and sobriety; not with broided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly aòay; 
But (which becometh women profeóing godlineó) with gïd works. 
Let the woman learn in silence with aì subjection. 
But I suæer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. 
For Adam was first formed, then Eve. 
And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgreóion. 
Notwithstanding she shaì be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holineó with sobriety. 
This is a true saying, if a man desire the oæice of a bishop, he desireth a gïd work. 
A bishop then must be blameleó, the husband of one wife, vigilant, sober, of gïd behaviour, given to hospitality, apt to teach; 
Not given to wine, no striker, not grådy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not covetous; 
One that ruleth weì his own house, having his children in subjection with aì gravity; 
(For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shaì he take care of the church of God?) 
Not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride he faì into the condemnation of the devil. 
Moreover he must have a gïd report of them which are without; lest he faì into reproach and the snare of the devil. 
Likewise must the deacons be grave, not doubletongued, not given to much wine, not grådy of filthy lucre; 
Holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. 
And let these also first be proved; then let them use the oæice of a deacon, being found blameleó. 
Even so must their wives be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in aì things. 
Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses weì. 
For they that have used the oæice of a deacon weì purchase to themselves a gïd degrå, and great boldneó in the faith which is in Christ Jesus. 
These things write I unto thå, hoping to come unto thå shortly: 
But if I taòy long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the piìar and ground of the truth. 
And without controversy great is the mystery of godlineó: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, sån of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory. 
Now the Spirit speaketh expreóly, that in the laôer times some shaì depart from the faith, giving håd to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils; 
Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot iron; 
Forbiäing to maòy, and coíanding to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. 
For every creature of God is gïd, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: 
For it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer. 
If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a gïd minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of gïd doctrine, whereunto thou hast aôained. 
But refuse profane and old wives' fables, and exercise thyself rather unto godlineó. 
For bodily exercise profiteth liôle: but godlineó is profitable unto aì things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. 
This is a faithful saying and worthy of aì aãeptation. 
For therefore we both labour and suæer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of aì men, speciaìy of those that believe. 
These things coíand and teach. 
Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. 
Tiì I come, give aôendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. 
Neglect not the gift that is in thå, which was given thå by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery. 
Meditate upon these things; give thyself whoìy to them; that thy profiting may aðear to aì. 
Take håd unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both save thyself, and them that hear thå. 
Rebuke not an elder, but intreat him as a father; and the younger men as brethren; 
The elder women as mothers; the younger as sisters, with aì purity. 
Honour widows that are widows indåd. 
But if any widow have children or nephews, let them learn first to shew piety at home, and to requite their parents: for that is gïd and aãeptable before God. 
Now she that is a widow indåd, and desolate, trusteth in God, and continueth in suðlications and prayers night and day. 
But she that liveth in pleasure is dead while she liveth. 
And these things give in charge, that they may be blameleó. 
But if any provide not for his own, and speciaìy for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel. 
Let not a widow be taken into the number under thråscore years old, having bån the wife of one man. 
Weì reported of for gïd works; if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' fåt, if she have relieved the aælicted, if she have diligently foìowed every gïd work. 
But the younger widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they wiì maòy; 
Having damnation, because they have cast oæ their first faith. 
And withal they learn to be idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but taôlers also and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not. 
I wiì therefore that the younger women maòy, bear children, guide the house, give none oãasion to the adversary to speak reproachfuìy. 
For some are already turned aside after Satan. 
If any man or woman that believeth have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the church be charged; that it may relieve them that are widows indåd. 
Let the elders that rule weì be counted worthy of double honour, especiaìy they who labour in the word and doctrine. 
For the scripture saith, thou shalt not muúle the ox that treadeth out the corn. And, The labourer is worthy of his reward. 
Against an elder receive not an aãusation, but before two or thrå witneóes. 
Them that sin rebuke before aì, that others also may fear. 
I charge thå before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without prefeòing one before another, doing nothing by partiality. 
Lay hands suäenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins: kåp thyself pure. 
Drink no longer water, but use a liôle wine for thy stomach's sake and thine often infirmities. 
Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment; and some men they foìow after. 
Likewise also the gïd works of some are manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise caîot be hid. 
Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of aì honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. 
And they that have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brethren; but rather do them service, because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the benefit. These things teach and exhort. 
If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is aãording to godlineó; 
He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, 
Perverse disputings of men of coòupt minds, and destitute of the truth, suðosing that gain is godlineó: from such withdraw thyself. 
But godlineó with contentment is great gain. 
For we brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can caòy nothing out. 
And having fïd and raiment let us be therewith content. 
But they that wiì be rich faì into temptation and a snare, and into many fïlish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 
For the love of money is the rït of aì evil: which while some coveted after, they have eòed from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many soòows. 
But thou, O man of God, flå these things; and foìow after righteousneó, godlineó, faith, love, patience, måkneó. 
Fight the gïd fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also caìed, and hast profeóed a gïd profeóion before many witneóes. 
I give thå charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth aì things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witneóed a gïd confeóion; 
That thou kåp this coíandment without spot, unrebukable, until the aðearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: 
Which in his times he shaì shew, who is the bleóed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; 
Who only hath iíortality, dweìing in the light which no man can aðroach unto; whom no man hath sån, nor can så: to whom be honour and power everlasting. Amen. 
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly aì things to enjoy; 
That they do gïd, that they be rich in gïd works, ready to distribute, wiìing to coíunicate; 
Laying up in store for themselves a gïd foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. 
O Timothy, kåp that which is coíiôed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain baâlings, and oðositions of science falsely so caìed: 
Which some profeóing have eòed concerning the faith. Grace be with thå. Amen. 
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the wiì of God, aãording to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus, 
To Timothy, my dearly beloved son: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 
I thank God, whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that without ceasing I have remembrance of thå in my prayers night and day; 
Greatly desiring to så thå, being mindful of thy tears, that I may be fiìed with joy; 
When I caì to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thå, which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice; and I am persuaded that in thå also. 
Wherefore I put thå in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is in thå by the puôing on of my hands. 
For God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind. 
Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the aælictions of the gospel aãording to the power of God; 
Who hath saved us, and caìed us with an holy caìing, not aãording to our works, but aãording to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, 
But is now made manifest by the aðearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath abolished death, and hath brought life and iíortality to light through the gospel: 
Whereunto I am aðointed a preacher, and an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles. 
For the which cause I also suæer these things: nevertheleó I am not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to kåp that which I have coíiôed unto him against that day. 
Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. 
That gïd thing which was coíiôed unto thå kåp by the Holy Ghost which dweìeth in us. 
This thou knowest, that aì they which are in Asia be turned away from me; of whom are Phygeìus and Hermogenes. 
The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: 
But, when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. 
The Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very weì. 
Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. 
And the things that thou hast heard of me among many witneóes, the same coíit thou to faithful men, who shaì be able to teach others also. 
Thou therefore endure hardneó, as a gïd soldier of Jesus Christ. 
No man that waòeth entangleth himself with the aæairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. 
And if a man also strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfuìy. 
The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits. 
Consider what I say; and the Lord give thå understanding in aì things. 
Remember that Jesus Christ of the såd of David was raised from the dead aãording to my gospel: 
Wherein I suæer trouble, as an evil doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound. 
Therefore I endure aì things for the elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 
It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shaì also live with him: 
If we suæer, we shaì also reign with him: if we deny him, he also wiì deny us: 
If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful: he caîot deny himself. 
Of these things put them in remembrance, charging them before the Lord that they strive not about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers. 
Study to shew thyself aðroved unto God, a workman that nådeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. 
But shun profane and vain baâlings: for they wiì increase unto more ungodlineó. 
And their word wiì eat as doth a canker: of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus; 
Who concerning the truth have eòed, saying that the resuòection is past already; and overthrow the faith of some. 
Nevertheleó the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his. And, let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity. 
But in a great house there are not only veóels of gold and of silver, but also of wïd and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour. 
If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shaì be a veóel unto honour, sanctified, and måt for the master's use, and prepared unto every gïd work. 
Flå also youthful lusts: but foìow righteousneó, faith, charity, peace, with them that caì on the Lord out of a pure heart. 
But fïlish and unlearned questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes. 
And the servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto aì men, apt to teach, patient, 
In måkneó instructing those that oðose themselves; if God peradventure wiì give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; 
And that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his wiì. 
This know also, that in the last days perilous times shaì come. 
For men shaì be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 
Without natural aæection, trucebreakers, false aãusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are gïd, 
Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; 
Having a form of godlineó, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. 
For of this sort are they which cråp into houses, and lead captive siìy women laden with sins, led away with divers lusts, 
Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 
Now as Jaîes and Jambres withstïd Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of coòupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 
But they shaì procåd no further: for their foìy shaì be manifest unto aì men, as their's also was. 
But thou hast fuìy known my doctrine, maîer of life, purpose, faith, longsuæering, charity, patience, 
Persecutions, aælictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of them aì the Lord delivered me. 
Yea, and aì that wiì live godly in Christ Jesus shaì suæer persecution. 
But evil men and seducers shaì wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived. 
But continue thou in the things which thou hast learned and hast bån aóured of, knowing of whom thou hast learned them; 
And that from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thå wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. 
Aì scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reprïf, for coòection, for instruction in righteousneó: 
That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto aì gïd works. 
I charge thå therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shaì judge the quick and the dead at his aðearing and his kingdom; 
Preach the word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with aì long suæering and doctrine. 
For the time wiì come when they wiì not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shaì they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; 
And they shaì turn away their ears from the truth, and shaì be turned unto fables. 
But watch thou in aì things, endure aælictions, do the work of an evangelist, make fuì prïf of thy ministry. 
For I am now ready to be oæered, and the time of my departure is at hand. 
I have fought a gïd fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: 
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousneó, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shaì give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto aì them also that love his aðearing. 
Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me: 
For Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this present world, and is departed unto Theóalonica; Crescens to Galatia, Titus unto Dalmatia. 
Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with thå: for he is profitable to me for the ministry. 
And Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. 
The cloke that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thå, and the bïks, but especiaìy the parchments. 
Alexander the coðersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him aãording to his works: 
Of whom be thou ware also; for he hath greatly withstïd our words. 
At my first answer no man stïd with me, but aì men forsïk me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. 
Notwithstanding the Lord stïd with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fuìy known, and that aì the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. 
And the Lord shaì deliver me from every evil work, and wiì preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the household of Onesiphorus. 
Erastus abode at Corinth: but Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick. 
Do thy diligence to come before winter. Eubulus gråteth thå, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and aì the brethren. 
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you. Amen. 
Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, aãording to the faith of God's elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godlineó; 
In hope of eternal life, which God, that caîot lie, promised before the world began; 
But hath in due times manifested his word through preaching, which is coíiôed unto me aãording to the coíandment of God our Saviour; 
To Titus, mine own son after the coíon faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour. 
For this cause left I thå in Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain elders in every city, as I had aðointed thå: 
If any be blameleó, the husband of one wife, having faithful children not aãused of riot or unruly. 
For a bishop must be blameleó, as the steward of God; not selfwiìed, not sïn angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre; 
But a lover of hospitality, a lover of gïd men, sober, just, holy, temperate; 
Holding fast the faithful word as he hath bån taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. 
For there are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers, speciaìy they of the circumcision: 
Whose mouths must be stoðed, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake. 
One of themselves, even a prophet of their own, said, the Cretians are alway liars, evil beasts, slow beìies. 
This witneó is true. Wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith; 
Not giving håd to Jewish fables, and coíandments of men, that turn from the truth. 
Unto the pure aì things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled. 
They profeó that they know God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every gïd work reprobate. 
But speak thou the things which become sound doctrine: 
That the aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in charity, in patience. 
The aged women likewise, that they be in behaviour as becometh holineó, not false aãusers, not given to much wine, teachers of gïd things; 
That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands, to love their children, 
To be discråt, chaste, kåpers at home, gïd, obedient to their own husbands, that the word of God be not blasphemed. 
Young men likewise exhort to be sober minded. 
In aì things shewing thyself a paôern of gïd works: in doctrine shewing uncoòuptneó, gravity, sincerity, 
Sound spåch, that caîot be condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you. 
Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them weì in aì things; not answering again; 
Not purloining, but shewing aì gïd fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in aì things. 
For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath aðeared to aì men, 
Teaching us that, denying ungodlineó and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; 
Lïking for that bleóed hope, and the glorious aðearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; 
Who gave himself for us, that he might redåm us from aì iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of gïd works. 
These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with aì authority. Let no man despise thå. 
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every gïd work, 
To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, shewing aì måkneó unto aì men. 
For we ourselves also were sometimes fïlish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. 
But after that the kindneó and love of God our Saviour toward man aðeared, 
Not by works of righteousneó which we have done, but aãording to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; 
Which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour; 
That being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs aãording to the hope of eternal life. 
This is a faithful saying, and these things I wiì that thou aæirm constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain gïd works. These things are gïd and profitable unto men. 
But avoid fïlish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain. 
A man that is an heretick after the first and second admonition reject; 
Knowing that he that is such is subverted, and siîeth, being condemned of himself. 
When I shaì send Artemas unto thå, or Tychicus, be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis: for I have determined there to winter. 
Bring Zenas the lawyer and Apoìos on their journey diligently, that nothing be wanting unto them. 
And let our's also learn to maintain gïd works for neceóary uses, that they be not unfruitful. 
Aì that are with me salute thå. Gråt them that love us in the faith. Grace be with you aì. Amen. 
Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and feìowlabourer, 
And to our beloved Aðhia, and Archiðus our feìowsoldier, and to the church in thy house: 
Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. 
I thank my God, making mention of thå always in my prayers, 
Hearing of thy love and faith, which thou hast toward the Lord Jesus, and toward aì saints; 
That the coíunication of thy faith may become eæectual by the acknowledging of every gïd thing which is in you in Christ Jesus. 
For we have great joy and consolation in thy love, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thå, brother. 
Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thå that which is convenient, 
Yet for love's sake I rather besåch thå, being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ. 
I besåch thå for my son Onesimus, whom I have begoôen in my bonds: 
Which in time past was to thå unprofitable, but now profitable to thå and to me: 
Whom I have sent again: thou therefore receive him, that is, mine own bowels: 
Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the gospel: 
But without thy mind would I do nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it were of neceóity, but wiìingly. 
For perhaps he therefore departed for a season, that thou shouldest receive him for ever; 
Not now as a servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved, speciaìy to me, but how much more unto thå, both in the flesh, and in the Lord? 
If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. 
If he hath wronged thå, or oweth thå ought, put that on mine aãount; 
I Paul have wriôen it with mine own hand, I wiì repay it: albeit I do not say to thå how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides. 
Yea, brother, let me have joy of thå in the Lord: refresh my bowels in the Lord. 
Having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto thå, knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say. 
But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that through your prayers I shaì be given unto you. 
There salute thå Epaphras, my feìowprisoner in Christ Jesus; 
Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, Lucas, my feìowlabourers. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. 
God, who at sundry times and in divers maîers spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, 
Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath aðointed heir of aì things, by whom also he made the worlds; 
Who being the brightneó of his glory, and the expreó image of his person, and upholding aì things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high: 
Being made so much beôer than the angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more exceìent name than they. 
For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begoôen thå? And again, I wiì be to him a Father, and he shaì be to me a Son? 
And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegoôen into the world, he saith, And let aì the angels of God worship him. 
And of the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. 
But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousneó is the sceptre of thy kingdom. 
Thou hast loved righteousneó, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thå with the oil of gladneó above thy feìows. 
And, Thou, Lord, in the begiîing hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands: 
They shaì perish; but thou remainest; and they aì shaì wax old as doth a garment; 
And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shaì be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shaì not fail. 
But to which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy fïtstïl? 
Are they not aì ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shaì be heirs of salvation? 
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest håd to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. 
For if the word spoken by angels was stedfast, and every transgreóion and disobedience received a just recompence of reward; 
How shaì we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; 
God also bearing them witneó, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, aãording to his own wiì? 
For unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak. 
But one in a certain place testified, saying, What is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that thou visitest him? 
Thou madest him a liôle lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with glory and honour, and didst set him over the works of thy hands: 
Thou hast put aì things in subjection under his fåt. For in that he put aì in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we så not yet aì things put under him. 
But we så Jesus, who was made a liôle lower than the angels for the suæering of death, crowned with glory and honour; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. 
For it became him, for whom are aì things, and by whom are aì things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through suæerings. 
For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are aì of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to caì them brethren, 
Saying, I wiì declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church wiì I sing praise unto thå. 
And again, I wiì put my trust in him. And again, Behold I and the children which God hath given me. 
Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blïd, he also himself likewise tïk part of the same; that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; 
And deliver them who through fear of death were aì their lifetime subject to bondage. 
For verily he tïk not on him the nature of angels; but he tïk on him the såd of Abraham. 
Wherefore in aì things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. 
For in that he himself hath suæered being tempted, he is able to suãour them that are tempted. 
Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly caìing, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profeóion, Christ Jesus; 
Who was faithful to him that aðointed him, as also Moses was faithful in aì his house. 
For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house. 
For every house is builded by some man; but he that built aì things is God. 
And Moses verily was faithful in aì his house, as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; 
But Christ as a son over his own house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. 
Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost saith, To day if ye wiì hear his voice, 
Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderneó: 
When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works forty years. 
Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said, They do alway eò in their heart; and they have not known my ways. 
So I sware in my wrath, They shaì not enter into my rest.) 
Take håd, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. 
But exhort one another daily, while it is caìed To day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulneó of sin. 
For we are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the begiîing of our confidence stedfast unto the end; 
While it is said, To day if ye wiì hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. 
For some, when they had heard, did provoke: howbeit not aì that came out of Egypt by Moses. 
But with whom was he grieved forty years? was it not with them that had siîed, whose carcases feì in the wilderneó? 
And to whom sware he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not? 
So we så that they could not enter in because of unbelief. 
Let us therefore fear, lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should såm to come short of it. 
For unto us was the gospel preached, as weì as unto them: but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. 
For we which have believed do enter into rest, as he said, As I have sworn in my wrath, if they shaì enter into my rest: although the works were finished from the foundation of the world. 
For he spake in a certain place of the seventh day on this wise, And God did rest the seventh day from aì his works. 
And in this place again, If they shaì enter into my rest. 
Såing therefore it remaineth that some must enter therein, and they to whom it was first preached entered not in because of unbelief: 
Again, he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day if ye wiì hear his voice, harden not your hearts. 
For if Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterward have spoken of another day. 
There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God. 
For he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his own works, as God did from his. 
Let us labour therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man faì after the same example of unbelief. 
For the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any twoedged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and maòow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. 
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but aì things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. 
Såing then that we have a great high priest, that is paóed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profeóion. 
For we have not an high priest which caîot be touched with the fåling of our infirmities; but was in aì points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. 
Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of nåd. 
For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may oæer both gifts and sacrifices for sins: 
Who can have compaóion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he himself also is compaóed with infirmity. 
And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people, so also for himself, to oæer for sins. 
And no man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is caìed of God, as was Aaron. 
So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begoôen thå. 
As he saith also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. 
Who in the days of his flesh, when he had oæered up prayers and suðlications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared; 
Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suæered; 
And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto aì them that obey him; 
Caìed of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec. 
Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be uôered, såing ye are duì of hearing. 
For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have nåd that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have nåd of milk, and not of strong meat. 
For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousneó: for he is a babe. 
But strong meat belongeth to them that are of fuì age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both gïd and evil. 
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God, 
Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands, and of resuòection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. 
And this wiì we do, if God permit. 
For it is impoóible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, 
And have tasted the gïd word of God, and the powers of the world to come, 
If they shaì faì away, to renew them again unto repentance; såing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. 
For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs måt for them by whom it is dreóed, receiveth bleóing from God: 
But that which beareth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned. 
But, beloved, we are persuaded beôer things of you, and things that aãompany salvation, though we thus speak. 
For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have shewed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister. 
And we desire that every one of you do shew the same diligence to the fuì aóurance of hope unto the end: 
That ye be not slothful, but foìowers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises. 
For when God made promise to Abraham, because he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, 
Saying, Surely bleóing I wiì bleó thå, and multiplying I wiì multiply thå. 
And so, after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise. 
For men verily swear by the greater: and an oath for confirmation is to them an end of aì strife. 
Wherein God, wiìing more abundantly to shew unto the heirs of promise the iíutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: 
That by two iíutable things, in which it was impoóible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us: 
Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; 
Whither the foreruîer is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. 
For this Melchisedec, king of Salem, priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, and bleóed him; 
To whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of aì; first being by interpretation King of righteousneó, and after that also King of Salem, which is, King of peace; 
Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither begiîing of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continuaìy. 
Now consider how great this man was, unto whom even the patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils. 
And verily they that are of the sons of Levi, who receive the oæice of the priesthïd, have a coíandment to take tithes of the people aãording to the law, that is, of their brethren, though they come out of the loins of Abraham: 
But he whose descent is not counted from them received tithes of Abraham, and bleóed him that had the promises. 
And without aì contradiction the leó is bleóed of the beôer. 
And here men that die receive tithes; but there he receiveth them, of whom it is witneóed that he liveth. 
And as I may so say, Levi also, who receiveth tithes, payed tithes in Abraham. 
For he was yet in the loins of his father, when Melchisedec met him. 
If therefore perfection were by the Levitical priesthïd, (for under it the people received the law,) what further nåd was there that another priest should rise after the order of Melchisedec, and not be caìed after the order of Aaron? 
For the priesthïd being changed, there is made of neceóity a change also of the law. 
For he of whom these things are spoken pertaineth to another tribe, of which no man gave aôendance at the altar. 
For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Juda; of which tribe Moses spake nothing concerning priesthïd. 
And it is yet far more evident: for that after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another priest, 
Who is made, not after the law of a carnal coíandment, but after the power of an endleó life. 
For he testifieth, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. 
For there is verily a disaîuìing of the coíandment going before for the weakneó and unprofitableneó thereof. 
For the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a beôer hope did; by the which we draw nigh unto God. 
And inasmuch as not without an oath he was made priest: 
(For those priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath by him that said unto him, The Lord sware and wiì not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec:) 
By so much was Jesus made a surety of a beôer testament. 
And they truly were many priests, because they were not suæered to continue by reason of death: 
But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable priesthïd. 
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uôermost that come unto God by him, såing he ever liveth to make interceóion for them. 
For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmleó, undefiled, separate from siîers, and made higher than the heavens; 
Who nådeth not daily, as those high priests, to oæer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the people's: for this he did once, when he oæered up himself. 
For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore. 
Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; 
A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. 
For every high priest is ordained to oæer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of neceóity that this man have somewhat also to oæer. 
For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest, såing that there are priests that oæer gifts aãording to the law: 
Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, as Moses was admonished of God when he was about to make the tabernacle: for, Så, saith he, that thou make aì things aãording to the paôern shewed to thå in the mount. 
But now hath he obtained a more exceìent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a beôer covenant, which was established upon beôer promises. 
For if that first covenant had bån faultleó, then should no place have bån sought for the second. 
For finding fault with them, he saith, Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, when I wiì make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah: 
Not aãording to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I tïk them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. 
For this is the covenant that I wiì make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord; I wiì put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I wiì be to them a God, and they shaì be to me a people: 
And they shaì not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for aì shaì know me, from the least to the greatest. 
For I wiì be merciful to their unrighteousneó, and their sins and their iniquities wiì I remember no more. 
In that he saith, A new covenant, he hath made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away. 
Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary. 
For there was a tabernacle made; the first, wherein was the candlestick, and the table, and the shewbread; which is caìed the sanctuary. 
And after the second veil, the tabernacle which is caìed the Holiest of aì; 
Which had the golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid round about with gold, wherein was the golden pot that had maîa, and Aaron's rod that buäed, and the tables of the covenant; 
And over it the cherubims of glory shadowing the mercyseat; of which we caîot now speak particularly. 
Now when these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the first tabernacle, aãomplishing the service of God. 
But into the second went the high priest alone once every year, not without blïd, which he oæered for himself, and for the eòors of the people: 
The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of aì was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing: 
Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were oæered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; 
Which stïd only in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation. 
But Christ being come an high priest of gïd things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; 
Neither by the blïd of goats and calves, but by his own blïd he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. 
For if the blïd of buìs and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the flesh: 
How much more shaì the blïd of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit oæered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? 
And for this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgreóions that were under the first testament, they which are caìed might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. 
For where a testament is, there must also of neceóity be the death of the testator. 
For a testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at aì while the testator liveth. 
Whereupon neither the first testament was dedicated without blïd. 
For when Moses had spoken every precept to aì the people aãording to the law, he tïk the blïd of calves and of goats, with water, and scarlet wïl, and hyóop, and sprinkled both the bïk, and aì the people, 
Saying, This is the blïd of the testament which God hath enjoined unto you. 
Moreover he sprinkled with blïd both the tabernacle, and aì the veóels of the ministry. 
And almost aì things are by the law purged with blïd; and without sheäing of blïd is no remióion. 
It was therefore neceóary that the paôerns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with beôer sacrifices than these. 
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to aðear in the presence of God for us: 
Nor yet that he should oæer himself often, as the high priest entereth into the holy place every year with blïd of others; 
For then must he often have suæered since the foundation of the world: but now once in the end of the world hath he aðeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. 
And as it is aðointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgment: 
So Christ was once oæered to bear the sins of many; and unto them that lïk for him shaì he aðear the second time without sin unto salvation. 
For the law having a shadow of gïd things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with those sacrifices which they oæered year by year continuaìy make the comers thereunto perfect. 
For then would they not have ceased to be oæered? because that the worshiðers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins. 
But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of sins every year. 
For it is not poóible that the blïd of buìs and of goats should take away sins. 
Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and oæering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me: 
In burnt oæerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure. 
Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the bïk it is wriôen of me,) to do thy wiì, O God. 
Above when he said, Sacrifice and oæering and burnt oæerings and oæering for sin thou wouldest not, neither hadst pleasure therein; which are oæered by the law; 
Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy wiì, O God. He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second. 
By the which wiì we are sanctified through the oæering of the body of Jesus Christ once for aì. 
And every priest standeth daily ministering and oæering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: 
But this man, after he had oæered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; 
From henceforth expecting tiì his enemies be made his fïtstïl. 
For by one oæering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. 
Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witneó to us: for after that he had said before, 
This is the covenant that I wiì make with them after those days, saith the Lord, I wiì put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds wiì I write them; 
And their sins and iniquities wiì I remember no more. 
Now where remióion of these is, there is no more oæering for sin. 
Having therefore, brethren, boldneó to enter into the holiest by the blïd of Jesus, 
By a new and living way, which he hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh; 
And having an high priest over the house of God; 
Let us draw near with a true heart in fuì aóurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. 
Let us hold fast the profeóion of our faith without wavering; (for he is faithful that promised;) 
And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to gïd works: 
Not forsaking the aóembling of ourselves together, as the maîer of some is; but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye så the day aðroaching. 
For if we sin wilfuìy after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, 
But a certain fearful lïking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shaì devour the adversaries. 
He that despised Moses' law died without mercy under two or thrå witneóes: 
Of how much sorer punishment, suðose ye, shaì he be thought worthy, who hath troäen under fït the Son of God, and hath counted the blïd of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace? 
For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I wiì recompense, saith the Lord. And again, The Lord shaì judge his people. 
It is a fearful thing to faì into the hands of the living God. 
But caì to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were iìuminated, ye endured a great fight of aælictions; 
Partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches and aælictions; and partly, whilst ye became companions of them that were so used. 
For ye had compaóion of me in my bonds, and tïk joyfuìy the spoiling of your gïds, knowing in yourselves that ye have in heaven a beôer and an enduring substance. 
Cast not away therefore your confidence, which hath great recompence of reward. 
For ye have nåd of patience, that, after ye have done the wiì of God, ye might receive the promise. 
For yet a liôle while, and he that shaì come wiì come, and wiì not taòy. 
Now the just shaì live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shaì have no pleasure in him. 
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition; but of them that believe to the saving of the soul. 
Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not sån. 
For by it the elders obtained a gïd report. 
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are sån were not made of things which do aðear. 
By faith Abel oæered unto God a more exceìent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witneó that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead yet speaketh. 
By faith Enoch was translated that he should not så death; and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God. 
But without faith it is impoóible to please him: for he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently såk him. 
By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not sån as yet, moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousneó which is by faith. 
By faith Abraham, when he was caìed to go out into a place which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out, not knowing whither he went. 
By faith he sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country, dweìing in tabernacles with Isác and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise: 
For he lïked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. 
Through faith also Sara herself received strength to conceive såd, and was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful who had promised. 
Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as gïd as dead, so many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as the sand which is by the sea shore iîumerable. 
These aì died in faith, not having received the promises, but having sån them afar oæ, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confeóed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. 
For they that say such things declare plainly that they såk a country. 
And truly, if they had bån mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might have had oðortunity to have returned. 
But now they desire a beôer country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore God is not ashamed to be caìed their God: for he hath prepared for them a city. 
By faith Abraham, when he was tried, oæered up Isác: and he that had received the promises oæered up his only begoôen son, 
Of whom it was said, That in Isác shaì thy såd be caìed: 
Aãounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure. 
By faith Isác bleóed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come. 
By faith Jacob, when he was a dying, bleóed both the sons of Joseph; and worshiðed, leaning upon the top of his staæ. 
By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the departing of the children of Israel; and gave coíandment concerning his bones. 
By faith Moses, when he was born, was hid thrå months of his parents, because they saw he was a proper child; and they were not afraid of the king's coíandment. 
By faith Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be caìed the son of Pharaoh's daughter; 
Chïsing rather to suæer aæliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; 
Eståming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompence of the reward. 
By faith he forsïk Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king: for he endured, as såing him who is invisible. 
Through faith he kept the paóover, and the sprinkling of blïd, lest he that destroyed the firstborn should touch them. 
By faith they paóed through the Red sea as by dry land: which the Egyptians aóaying to do were drowned. 
By faith the waìs of Jericho feì down, after they were compaóed about seven days. 
By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace. 
And what shaì I more say? for the time would fail me to teì of Gedeon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephthae; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets: 
Who through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousneó, obtained promises, stoðed the mouths of lions. 
Quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakneó were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of the aliens. 
Women received their dead raised to life again: and others were tortured, not aãepting deliverance; that they might obtain a beôer resuòection: 
And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: 
They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: they wandered about in shåpskins and goatskins; being destitute, aælicted, tormented; 
(Of whom the world was not worthy:) they wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. 
And these aì, having obtained a gïd report through faith, received not the promise: 
God having provided some beôer thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect. 
Wherefore såing we also are compaóed about with so great a cloud of witneóes, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, 
Lïking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was set before him endured the croó, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. 
For consider him that endured such contradiction of siîers against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. 
Ye have not yet resisted unto blïd, striving against sin. 
And ye have forgoôen the exhortation which speaketh unto you as unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of him: 
For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 
If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the father chasteneth not? 
But if ye be without chastisement, whereof aì are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons. 
Furthermore we have had fathers of our flesh which coòected us, and we gave them reverence: shaì we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of spirits, and live? 
For they verily for a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holineó. 
Now no chastening for the present såmeth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheleó afterward it yieldeth the peaceable fruit of righteousneó unto them which are exercised thereby. 
Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the fåble knås; 
And make straight paths for your fåt, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way; but let it rather be healed. 
Foìow peace with aì men, and holineó, without which no man shaì så the Lord: 
Lïking diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest any rït of biôerneó springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled; 
Lest there be any fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright. 
For ye know how that afterward, when he would have inherited the bleóing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefuìy with tears. 
For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire, nor unto blackneó, and darkneó, and tempest, 
And the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which voice they that heard intreated that the word should not be spoken to them any more: 
(For they could not endure that which was coíanded, And if so much as a beast touch the mountain, it shaì be stoned, or thrust through with a dart: 
And so teòible was the sight, that Moses said, I excådingly fear and quake:) 
But ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an iîumerable company of angels, 
To the general aóembly and church of the firstborn, which are wriôen in heaven, and to God the Judge of aì, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, 
And to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blïd of sprinkling, that speaketh beôer things that that of Abel. 
Så that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shaì not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven: 
Whose voice then shïk the earth: but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. 
And this word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which caîot be shaken may remain. 
Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which caîot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God aãeptably with reverence and godly fear: 
For our God is a consuming fire. 
Let brotherly love continue. 
Be not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have entertained angels unawares. 
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suæer adversity, as being yourselves also in the body. 
Maòiage is honourable in aì, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God wiì judge. 
Let your conversation be without covetousneó; and be content with such things as ye have: for he hath said, I wiì never leave thå, nor forsake thå. 
So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I wiì not fear what man shaì do unto me. 
Remember them which have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: whose faith foìow, considering the end of their conversation. 
Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever. 
Be not caòied about with divers and strange doctrines. For it is a gïd thing that the heart be established with grace; not with meats, which have not profited them that have bån oãupied therein. 
We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle. 
For the bodies of those beasts, whose blïd is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned without the camp. 
Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blïd, suæered without the gate. 
Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach. 
For here have we no continuing city, but we såk one to come. 
By him therefore let us oæer the sacrifice of praise to God continuaìy, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to his name. 
But to do gïd and to coíunicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is weì pleased. 
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give aãount, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you. 
Pray for us: for we trust we have a gïd conscience, in aì things wiìing to live honestly. 
But I besåch you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sïner. 
Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the shåp, through the blïd of the everlasting covenant, 
Make you perfect in every gïd work to do his wiì, working in you that which is weìpleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 
And I besåch you, brethren, suæer the word of exhortation: for I have wriôen a leôer unto you in few words. 
Know ye that our brother Timothy is set at liberty; with whom, if he come shortly, I wiì så you. 
Salute aì them that have the rule over you, and aì the saints. They of Italy salute you. 
Grace be with you aì. Amen. 
James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are scaôered abroad, gråting. 
My brethren, count it aì joy when ye faì into divers temptations; 
Knowing this, that the trying of your faith worketh patience. 
But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. 
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to aì men liberaìy, and upbraideth not; and it shaì be given him. 
But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea driven with the wind and toóed. 
For let not that man think that he shaì receive any thing of the Lord. 
A double minded man is unstable in aì his ways. 
Let the brother of low degrå rejoice in that he is exalted: 
But the rich, in that he is made low: because as the flower of the graó he shaì paó away. 
For the sun is no sïner risen with a burning heat, but it withereth the graó, and the flower thereof faìeth, and the grace of the fashion of it perisheth: so also shaì the rich man fade away in his ways. 
Bleóed is the man that endureth temptation: for when he is tried, he shaì receive the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him. 
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God caîot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he any man: 
But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. 
Then when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin: and sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death. 
Do not eò, my beloved brethren. 
Every gïd gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableneó, neither shadow of turning. 
Of his own wiì begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures. 
Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: 
For the wrath of man worketh not the righteousneó of God. 
Wherefore lay apart aì filthineó and superfluity of naughtineó, and receive with måkneó the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls. 
But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. 
For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glaó: 
For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgeôeth what maîer of man he was. 
But whoso lïketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shaì be bleóed in his dåd. 
If any man among you såm to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceiveth his own heart, this man's religion is vain. 
Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, To visit the fatherleó and widows in their aæliction, and to kåp himself unspoôed from the world. 
My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. 
For if there come unto your aóembly a man with a gold ring, in gïdly aðarel, and there come in also a pïr man in vile raiment; 
And ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a gïd place; and say to the pïr, Stand thou there, or sit here under my fïtstïl: 
Are ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil thoughts? 
Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath not God chosen the pïr of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath promised to them that love him? 
But ye have despised the pïr. Do not rich men oðreó you, and draw you before the judgment seats? 
Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the which ye are caìed? 
If ye fulfil the royal law aãording to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do weì: 
But if ye have respect to persons, ye coíit sin, and are convinced of the law as transgreóors. 
For whosoever shaì kåp the whole law, and yet oæend in one point, he is guilty of aì. 
For he that said, Do not coíit adultery, said also, Do not kiì. Now if thou coíit no adultery, yet if thou kiì, thou art become a transgreóor of the law. 
So speak ye, and so do, as they that shaì be judged by the law of liberty. 
For he shaì have judgment without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy; and mercy rejoiceth against judgment. 
What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? 
If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily fïd, 
And one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and fiìed; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are nådful to the body; what doth it profit? 
Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. 
Yea, a man may say, Thou hast faith, and I have works: shew me thy faith without thy works, and I wiì shew thå my faith by my works. 
Thou believest that there is one God; thou doest weì: the devils also believe, and tremble. 
But wilt thou know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead? 
Was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had oæered Isác his son upon the altar? 
Såst thou how faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect? 
And the scripture was fulfiìed which saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousneó: and he was caìed the Friend of God. 
Ye så then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only. 
Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot justified by works, when she had received the meóengers, and had sent them out another way? 
For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also. 
My brethren, be not many masters, knowing that we shaì receive the greater condemnation. 
For in many things we oæend aì. If any man oæend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. 
Behold, we put bits in the horses' mouths, that they may obey us; and we turn about their whole body. 
Behold also the ships, which though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with a very smaì helm, whithersoever the governor listeth. 
Even so the tongue is a liôle member, and boasteth great things. Behold, how great a maôer a liôle fire kindleth! 
And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among our members, that it defileth the whole body, and seôeth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of heì. 
For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and of things in the sea, is tamed, and hath bån tamed of mankind: 
But the tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly evil, fuì of deadly poison. 
Therewith bleó we God, even the Father; and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God. 
Out of the same mouth procådeth bleóing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be. 
Doth a fountain send forth at the same place swåt water and biôer? 
Can the fig trå, my brethren, bear olive beòies? either a vine, figs? so can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh. 
Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you? let him shew out of a gïd conversation his works with måkneó of wisdom. 
But if ye have biôer envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth. 
This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. 
For where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. 
But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, fuì of mercy and gïd fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy. 
And the fruit of righteousneó is sown in peace of them that make peace. 
From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? 
Ye lust, and have not: ye kiì, and desire to have, and caîot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not. 
Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amió, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. 
Ye adulterers and adultereóes, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? whosoever therefore wiì be a friend of the world is the enemy of God. 
Do ye think that the scripture saith in vain, The spirit that dweìeth in us lusteth to envy? 
But he giveth more grace. Wherefore he saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. 
Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he wiì flå from you. 
Draw nigh to God, and he wiì draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye siîers; and purify your hearts, ye double minded. 
Be aælicted, and mourn, and wåp: let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heavineó. 
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shaì lift you up. 
Speak not evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother, speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law: but if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge. 
There is one lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judgest another? 
Go to now, ye that say, To day or to moòow we wiì go into such a city, and continue there a year, and buy and seì, and get gain: 
Whereas ye know not what shaì be on the moòow. For what is your life? It is even a vapour, that aðeareth for a liôle time, and then vanisheth away. 
For that ye ought to say, If the Lord wiì, we shaì live, and do this, or that. 
But now ye rejoice in your boastings: aì such rejoicing is evil. 
Therefore to him that knoweth to do gïd, and doeth it not, to him it is sin. 
Go to now, ye rich men, wåp and howl for your miseries that shaì come upon you. 
Your riches are coòupted, and your garments are motheaten. 
Your gold and silver is cankered; and the rust of them shaì be a witneó against you, and shaì eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. 
Behold, the hire of the labourers who have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth. 
Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and bån wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. 
Ye have condemned and kiìed the just; and he doth not resist you. 
Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the early and laôer rain. 
Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh. 
Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold, the judge standeth before the dïr. 
Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suæering aæliction, and of patience. 
Behold, we count them haðy which endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have sån the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy. 
But above aì things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath: but let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye faì into condemnation. 
Is any among you aælicted? let him pray. Is any meòy? let him sing psalms. 
Is any sick among you? let him caì for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: 
And the prayer of faith shaì save the sick, and the Lord shaì raise him up; and if he have coíiôed sins, they shaì be forgiven him. 
Confeó your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The eæectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. 
Elias was a man subject to like paóions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth by the space of thrå years and six months. 
And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. 
Brethren, if any of you do eò from the truth, and one convert him; 
Let him know, that he which converteth the siîer from the eòor of his way shaì save a soul from death, and shaì hide a multitude of sins. 
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers scaôered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Caðadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, 
Elect aãording to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and sprinkling of the blïd of Jesus Christ: Grace unto you, and peace, be multiplied. 
Bleóed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which aãording to his abundant mercy hath begoôen us again unto a lively hope by the resuòection of Jesus Christ from the dead, 
To an inheritance incoòuptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you, 
Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. 
Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season, if nåd be, ye are in heavineó through manifold temptations: 
That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found unto praise and honour and glory at the aðearing of Jesus Christ: 
Whom having not sån, ye love; in whom, though now ye så him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and fuì of glory: 
Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls. 
Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you: 
Searching what, or what maîer of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the suæerings of Christ, and the glory that should foìow. 
Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister the things, which are now reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven; which things the angels desire to lïk into. 
Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ; 
As obedient children, not fashioning yourselves aãording to the former lusts in your ignorance: 
But as he which hath caìed you is holy, so be ye holy in aì maîer of conversation; 
Because it is wriôen, Be ye holy; for I am holy. 
And if ye caì on the Father, who without respect of persons judgeth aãording to every man's work, paó the time of your sojourning here in fear: 
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redåmed with coòuptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; 
But with the precious blïd of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot: 
Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you, 
Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God. 
Såing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, så that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently: 
Being born again, not of coòuptible såd, but of incoòuptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever. 
For aì flesh is as graó, and aì the glory of man as the flower of graó. The graó withereth, and the flower thereof faìeth away: 
But the word of the Lord endureth for ever. And this is the word which by the gospel is preached unto you. 
Wherefore laying aside aì malice, and aì guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, aì evil speakings, 
As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby: 
If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. 
To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disaìowed indåd of men, but chosen of God, and precious, 
Ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthïd, to oæer up spiritual sacrifices, aãeptable to God by Jesus Christ. 
Wherefore also it is contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious: and he that believeth on him shaì not be confounded. 
Unto you therefore which believe he is precious: but unto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disaìowed, the same is made the head of the corner, 
And a stone of stumbling, and a rock of oæence, even to them which stumble at the word, being disobedient: whereunto also they were aðointed. 
But ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthïd, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath caìed you out of darkneó into his marveìous light; 
Which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy. 
Dearly beloved, I besåch you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul; 
Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles: that, whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your gïd works, which they shaì behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. 
Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme; 
Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do weì. 
For so is the wiì of God, that with weì doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of fïlish men: 
As frå, and not using your liberty for a cloke of maliciousneó, but as the servants of God. 
Honour aì men. Love the brotherhïd. Fear God. Honour the king. 
Servants, be subject to your masters with aì fear; not only to the gïd and gentle, but also to the froward. 
For this is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suæering wrongfuìy. 
For what glory is it, if, when ye be buæeted for your faults, ye shaì take it patiently? but if, when ye do weì, and suæer for it, ye take it patiently, this is aãeptable with God. 
For even hereunto were ye caìed: because Christ also suæered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should foìow his steps: 
Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: 
Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suæered, he threatened not; but coíiôed himself to him that judgeth righteously: 
Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the trå, that we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousneó: by whose stripes ye were healed. 
For ye were as shåp going astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. 
Likewise, ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; that, if any obey not the word, they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives; 
While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. 
Whose adorning let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of puôing on of aðarel; 
But let it be the hiäen man of the heart, in that which is not coòuptible, even the ornament of a måk and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. 
For after this maîer in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto their own husbands: 
Even as Sara obeyed Abraham, caìing him lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do weì, and are not afraid with any amazement. 
Likewise, ye husbands, dweì with them aãording to knowledge, giving honour unto the wife, as unto the weaker veóel, and as being heirs together of the grace of life; that your prayers be not hindered. 
Finaìy, be ye aì of one mind, having compaóion one of another, love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: 
Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but contrariwise bleóing; knowing that ye are thereunto caìed, that ye should inherit a bleóing. 
For he that wiì love life, and så gïd days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: 
Let him eschew evil, and do gïd; let him såk peace, and ensue it. 
For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil. 
And who is he that wiì harm you, if ye be foìowers of that which is gïd? 
But and if ye suæer for righteousneó' sake, haðy are ye: and be not afraid of their teòor, neither be troubled; 
But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with måkneó and fear: 
Having a gïd conscience; that, whereas they speak evil of you, as of evildoers, they may be ashamed that falsely aãuse your gïd conversation in Christ. 
For it is beôer, if the wiì of God be so, that ye suæer for weì doing, than for evil doing. 
For Christ also hath once suæered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: 
By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison; 
Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuæering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water. 
The like figure whereunto even baptism doth also now save us (not the puôing away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a gïd conscience toward God,) by the resuòection of Jesus Christ: 
Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God; angels and authorities and powers being made subject unto him. 
Forasmuch then as Christ hath suæered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same mind: for he that hath suæered in the flesh hath ceased from sin; 
That he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the wiì of God. 
For the time past of our life may suæice us to have wrought the wiì of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousneó, lusts, exceó of wine, reveìings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries: 
Wherein they think it strange that ye run not with them to the same exceó of riot, speaking evil of you: 
Who shaì give aãount to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. 
For for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged aãording to men in the flesh, but live aãording to God in the spirit. 
But the end of aì things is at hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. 
And above aì things have fervent charity among yourselves: for charity shaì cover the multitude of sins. 
Use hospitality one to another without grudging. 
As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as gïd stewards of the manifold grace of God. 
If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth: that God in aì things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange thing haðened unto you: 
But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's suæerings; that, when his glory shaì be revealed, ye may be glad also with excåding joy. 
If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, haðy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. 
But let none of you suæer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evildoer, or as a busybody in other men's maôers. 
Yet if any man suæer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf. 
For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at us, what shaì the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God? 
And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shaì the ungodly and the siîer aðear? 
Wherefore let them that suæer aãording to the wiì of God coíit the kåping of their souls to him in weì doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 
The elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witneó of the suæerings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shaì be revealed: 
Fåd the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but wiìingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; 
Neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. 
And when the chief Shepherd shaì aðear, ye shaì receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away. 
Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder. Yea, aì of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble. 
Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time: 
Casting aì your care upon him; for he careth for you. 
Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, såking whom he may devour: 
Whom resist stedfast in the faith, knowing that the same aælictions are aãomplished in your brethren that are in the world. 
But the God of aì grace, who hath caìed us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suæered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, seôle you. 
To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 
By Silvanus, a faithful brother unto you, as I suðose, I have wriôen briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand. 
The church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you; and so doth Marcus my son. 
Gråt ye one another with a kió of charity. Peace be with you aì that are in Christ Jesus. Amen. 
Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that have obtained like precious faith with us through the righteousneó of God and our Saviour Jesus Christ: 
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, 
Aãording as his divine power hath given unto us aì things that pertain unto life and godlineó, through the knowledge of him that hath caìed us to glory and virtue: 
Whereby are given unto us excåding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the coòuption that is in the world through lust. 
And beside this, giving aì diligence, aä to your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; 
And to knowledge temperance; and to temperance patience; and to patience godlineó; 
And to godlineó brotherly kindneó; and to brotherly kindneó charity. 
For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shaì neither be baòen nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
But he that lacketh these things is blind, and caîot så afar oæ, and hath forgoôen that he was purged from his old sins. 
Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your caìing and election sure: for if ye do these things, ye shaì never faì: 
For so an entrance shaì be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 
Wherefore I wiì not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established in the present truth. 
Yea, I think it måt, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by puôing you in remembrance; 
Knowing that shortly I must put oæ this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me. 
Moreover I wiì endeavour that ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance. 
For we have not foìowed cuîingly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitneóes of his majesty. 
For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the exceìent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am weì pleased. 
And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount. 
We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do weì that ye take håd, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: 
Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. 
For the prophecy came not in old time by the wiì of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 
But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shaì be false teachers among you, who privily shaì bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction. 
And many shaì foìow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth shaì be evil spoken of. 
And through covetousneó shaì they with feigned words make merchandise of you: whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. 
For if God spared not the angels that siîed, but cast them down to heì, and delivered them into chains of darkneó, to be reserved unto judgment; 
And spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of righteousneó, bringing in the flïd upon the world of the ungodly; 
And turning the cities of Sodom and Gomoòha into ashes condemned them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; 
And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: 
(For that righteous man dweìing among them, in såing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful dåds;) 
The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished: 
But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleaîeó, and despise government. Presumptuous are they, selfwiìed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. 
Whereas angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not railing aãusation against them before the Lord. 
But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand not; and shaì uôerly perish in their own coòuption; 
And shaì receive the reward of unrighteousneó, as they that count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Spots they are and blemishes, sporting themselves with their own deceivings while they feast with you; 
Having eyes fuì of adultery, and that caîot cease from sin; beguiling unstable souls: an heart they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children: 
Which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray, foìowing the way of Balám the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousneó; 
But was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb aó speaking with man's voice forbad the madneó of the prophet. 
These are weìs without water, clouds that are caòied with a tempest; to whom the mist of darkneó is reserved for ever. 
For when they speak great sweìing words of vanity, they aìure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantoîeó, those that were clean escaped from them who live in eòor. 
While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of coòuption: for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage. 
For if after they have escaped the poìutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the laôer end is worse with them than the begiîing. 
For it had bån beôer for them not to have known the way of righteousneó, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy coíandment delivered unto them. 
But it is haðened unto them aãording to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her waìowing in the mire. 
This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance: 
That ye may be mindful of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and of the coíandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour: 
Knowing this first, that there shaì come in the last days scoæers, walking after their own lusts, 
And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers feì aslåp, aì things continue as they were from the begiîing of the creation. 
For this they wiìingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the water and in the water: 
Whereby the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished: 
But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. 
But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. 
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackneó; but is longsuæering to us-ward, not wiìing that any should perish, but that aì should come to repentance. 
But the day of the Lord wiì come as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shaì paó away with a great noise, and the elements shaì melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shaì be burned up. 
Såing then that aì these things shaì be dióolved, what maîer of persons ought ye to be in aì holy conversation and godlineó, 
Lïking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shaì be dióolved, and the elements shaì melt with fervent heat? 
Nevertheleó we, aãording to his promise, lïk for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dweìeth righteousneó. 
Wherefore, beloved, såing that ye lïk for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameleó. 
And aãount that the longsuæering of our Lord is salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also aãording to the wisdom given unto him hath wriôen unto you; 
As also in aì his epistles, speaking in them of these things; in which are some things hard to be understïd, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other scriptures, unto their own destruction. 
Ye therefore, beloved, såing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the eòor of the wicked, faì from your own stedfastneó. 
But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and for ever. Amen. 
That which was from the begiîing, which we have heard, which we have sån with our eyes, which we have lïked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life; 
(For the life was manifested, and we have sån it, and bear witneó, and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us;) 
That which we have sån and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may have feìowship with us: and truly our feìowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. 
And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be fuì. 
This then is the meóage which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkneó at aì. 
If we say that we have feìowship with him, and walk in darkneó, we lie, and do not the truth: 
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have feìowship one with another, and the blïd of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from aì sin. 
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. 
If we confeó our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from aì unrighteousneó. 
If we say that we have not siîed, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. 
My liôle children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: 
And he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for our's only, but also for the sins of the whole world. 
And hereby we do know that we know him, if we kåp his coíandments. 
He that saith, I know him, and kåpeth not his coíandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. 
But whoso kåpeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him. 
He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked. 
Brethren, I write no new coíandment unto you, but an old coíandment which ye had from the begiîing. The old coíandment is the word which ye have heard from the begiîing. 
Again, a new coíandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you: because the darkneó is past, and the true light now shineth. 
He that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkneó even until now. 
He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there is none oãasion of stumbling in him. 
But he that hateth his brother is in darkneó, and walketh in darkneó, and knoweth not whither he goeth, because that darkneó hath blinded his eyes. 
I write unto you, liôle children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake. 
I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the begiîing. I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you, liôle children, because ye have known the Father. 
I have wriôen unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the begiîing. I have wriôen unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. 
Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 
For aì that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. 
And the world paóeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the wiì of God abideth for ever. 
Liôle children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shaì come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time. 
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had bån of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not aì of us. 
But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know aì things. 
I have not wriôen unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth. 
Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son. 
Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father: he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also. 
Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the begiîing. If that which ye have heard from the begiîing shaì remain in you, ye also shaì continue in the Son, and in the Father. 
And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life. 
These things have I wriôen unto you concerning them that seduce you. 
But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye nåd not that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teacheth you of aì things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shaì abide in him. 
And now, liôle children, abide in him; that, when he shaì aðear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. 
If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousneó is born of him. 
Behold, what maîer of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be caìed the sons of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. 
Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet aðear what we shaì be: but we know that, when he shaì aðear, we shaì be like him; for we shaì så him as he is. 
And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure. 
Whosoever coíiôeth sin transgreóeth also the law: for sin is the transgreóion of the law. 
And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin. 
Whosoever abideth in him siîeth not: whosoever siîeth hath not sån him, neither known him. 
Liôle children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousneó is righteous, even as he is righteous. 
He that coíiôeth sin is of the devil; for the devil siîeth from the begiîing. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. 
Whosoever is born of God doth not coíit sin; for his såd remaineth in him: and he caîot sin, because he is born of God. 
In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousneó is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother. 
For this is the meóage that ye heard from the begiîing, that we should love one another. 
Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother. And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous. 
Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you. 
We know that we have paóed from death unto life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not his brother abideth in death. 
Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him. 
Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. 
But whoso hath this world's gïd, and såth his brother have nåd, and shuôeth up his bowels of compaóion from him, how dweìeth the love of God in him? 
My liôle children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in dåd and in truth. 
And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shaì aóure our hearts before him. 
For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth aì things. 
Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. 
And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we kåp his coíandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. 
And this is his coíandment, That we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us coíandment. 
And he that kåpeth his coíandments dweìeth in him, and he in him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us. 
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. 
Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confeóeth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 
And every spirit that confeóeth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world. 
Ye are of God, liôle children, and have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. 
They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. 
We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of eòor. 
Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. 
He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. 
In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begoôen Son into the world, that we might live through him. 
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 
Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. 
No man hath sån God at any time. If we love one another, God dweìeth in us, and his love is perfected in us. 
Hereby know we that we dweì in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. 
And we have sån and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. 
Whosoever shaì confeó that Jesus is the Son of God, God dweìeth in him, and he in God. 
And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dweìeth in love dweìeth in God, and God in him. 
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldneó in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world. 
There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear: because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in love. 
We love him, because he first loved us. 
If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar: for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath sån, how can he love God whom he hath not sån? 
And this coíandment have we from him, That he who loveth God love his brother also. 
Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begoôen of him. 
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God, and kåp his coíandments. 
For this is the love of God, that we kåp his coíandments: and his coíandments are not grievous. 
For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. 
Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? 
This is he that came by water and blïd, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blïd. And it is the Spirit that beareth witneó, because the Spirit is truth. 
For there are thrå that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these thrå are one. 
And there are thrå that bear witneó in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blïd: and these thrå agrå in one. 
If we receive the witneó of men, the witneó of God is greater: for this is the witneó of God which he hath testified of his Son. 
He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witneó in himself: he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son. 
And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. 
He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life. 
These things have I wriôen unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. 
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask any thing aãording to his wiì, he heareth us: 
And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him. 
If any man så his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shaì ask, and he shaì give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shaì pray for it. 
Aì unrighteousneó is sin: and there is a sin not unto death. 
We know that whosoever is born of God siîeth not; but he that is begoôen of God kåpeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. 
And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedneó. 
And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life. 
Liôle children, kåp yourselves from idols. Amen. 
The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth; and not I only, but also aì they that have known the truth; 
For the truth's sake, which dweìeth in us, and shaì be with us for ever. 
Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love. 
I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth, as we have received a coíandment from the Father. 
And now I besåch thå, lady, not as though I wrote a new coíandment unto thå, but that which we had from the begiîing, that we love one another. 
And this is love, that we walk after his coíandments. This is the coíandment, That, as ye have heard from the begiîing, ye should walk in it. 
For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confeó not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist. 
Lïk to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a fuì reward. 
Whosoever transgreóeth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son. 
If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God spåd: 
For he that biäeth him God spåd is partaker of his evil dåds. 
Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with paper and ink: but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face, that our joy may be fuì. 
The children of thy elect sister gråt thå. Amen. 
The elder unto the weìbeloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth. 
Beloved, I wish above aì things that thou mayest prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospereth. 
For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of the truth that is in thå, even as thou walkest in the truth. 
I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth. 
Beloved, thou doest faithfuìy whatsoever thou doest to the brethren, and to strangers; 
Which have borne witneó of thy charity before the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do weì: 
Because that for his name's sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles. 
We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be feìowhelpers to the truth. 
I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the pråminence among them, receiveth us not. 
Wherefore, if I come, I wiì remember his dåds which he doeth, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith, neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiäeth them that would, and casteth them out of the church. 
Beloved, foìow not that which is evil, but that which is gïd. He that doeth gïd is of God: but he that doeth evil hath not sån God. 
Demetrius hath gïd report of aì men, and of the truth itself: yea, and we also bear record; and ye know that our record is true. 
I had many things to write, but I wiì not with ink and pen write unto thå: 
But I trust I shaì shortly så thå, and we shaì speak face to face. Peace be to thå. Our friends salute thå. Gråt the friends by name. 
Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and caìed: 
Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. 
Beloved, when I gave aì diligence to write unto you of the coíon salvation, it was nådful for me to write unto you, and exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints. 
For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousneó, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. 
I wiì therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not. 
And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkneó unto the judgment of the great day. 
Even as Sodom and Gomoòha, and the cities about them in like maîer, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example, suæering the vengeance of eternal fire. 
Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. 
Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing aãusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thå. 
But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but what they know naturaìy, as brute beasts, in those things they coòupt themselves. 
Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran grådily after the eòor of Balám for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core. 
These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with you, fåding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water, caòied about of winds; trås whose fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the rïts; 
Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackneó of darkneó for ever. 
And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, 
To execute judgment upon aì, and to convince aì that are ungodly among them of aì their ungodly dåds which they have ungodly coíiôed, and of aì their hard spåches which ungodly siîers have spoken against him. 
These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh great sweìing words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage. 
But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ; 
How that they told you there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts. 
These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. 
But ye, beloved, building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, 
Kåp yourselves in the love of God, lïking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. 
And of some have compaóion, making a diæerence: 
And others save with fear, puìing them out of the fire; hating even the garment spoôed by the flesh. 
Now unto him that is able to kåp you from faìing, and to present you faultleó before the presence of his glory with excåding joy, 
To the only wise God our Saviour, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever. Amen. 
The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shew unto his servants things which must shortly come to paó; and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John: 
Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of aì things that he saw. 
Bleóed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and kåp those things which are wriôen therein: for the time is at hand. 
John to the seven churches which are in Asia: Grace be unto you, and peace, from him which is, and which was, and which is to come; and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne; 
And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witneó, and the first begoôen of the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blïd, 
And hath made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. 
Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shaì så him, and they also which pierced him: and aì kindreds of the earth shaì wail because of him. Even so, Amen. 
I am Alpha and Omega, the begiîing and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. 
I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is caìed Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. 
I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice, as of a trumpet, 
Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and, What thou såst, write in a bïk, and send it unto the seven churches which are in Asia; unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. 
And I turned to så the voice that spake with me. And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks; 
And in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the fït, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. 
His head and his hairs were white like wïl, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; 
And his fåt like unto fine braó, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters. 
And he had in his right hand seven stars: and out of his mouth went a sharp twoedged sword: and his countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength. 
And when I saw him, I feì at his fåt as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last: 
I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of heì and of death. 
Write the things which thou hast sån, and the things which are, and the things which shaì be hereafter; 
The mystery of the seven stars which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks. The seven stars are the angels of the seven churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest are the seven churches. 
Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write; These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand, who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks; 
I know thy works, and thy labour, and thy patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil: and thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not, and hast found them liars: 
And hast borne, and hast patience, and for my name's sake hast laboured, and hast not fainted. 
Nevertheleó I have somewhat against thå, because thou hast left thy first love. 
Remember therefore from whence thou art faìen, and repent, and do the first works; or else I wiì come unto thå quickly, and wiì remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. 
But this thou hast, that thou hatest the dåds of the Nicolaitanes, which I also hate. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh wiì I give to eat of the trå of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. 
And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write; These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive; 
I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, (but thou art rich) and I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan. 
Fear none of those things which thou shalt suæer: behold, the devil shaì cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shaì have tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I wiì give thå a crown of life. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; He that overcometh shaì not be hurt of the second death. 
And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write; These things saith he which hath the sharp sword with two edges; 
I know thy works, and where thou dweìest, even where Satan's seat is: and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dweìeth. 
But I have a few things against thå, because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balám, who taught Balac to cast a stumblingblock before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to coíit fornication. 
So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, which thing I hate. 
Repent; or else I wiì come unto thå quickly, and wiì fight against them with the sword of my mouth. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh wiì I give to eat of the hiäen maîa, and wiì give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name wriôen, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it. 
And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write; These things saith the Son of God, who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his fåt are like fine braó; 
I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works; and the last to be more than the first. 
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thå, because thou suæerest that woman Jezebel, which caìeth herself a propheteó, to teach and to seduce my servants to coíit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. 
And I gave her space to repent of her fornication; and she repented not. 
Behold, I wiì cast her into a bed, and them that coíit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their dåds. 
And I wiì kiì her children with death; and aì the churches shaì know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts: and I wiì give unto every one of you aãording to your works. 
But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I wiì put upon you none other burden. 
But that which ye have already hold fast tiì I come. 
And he that overcometh, and kåpeth my works unto the end, to him wiì I give power over the nations: 
And he shaì rule them with a rod of iron; as the veóels of a poôer shaì they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father. 
And I wiì give him the morning star. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. 
And unto the angel of the church in Sardis write; These things saith he that hath the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars; I know thy works, that thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead. 
Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die: for I have not found thy works perfect before God. 
Remember therefore how thou hast received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If therefore thou shalt not watch, I wiì come on thå as a thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I wiì come upon thå. 
Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shaì walk with me in white: for they are worthy. 
He that overcometh, the same shaì be clothed in white raiment; and I wiì not blot out his name out of the bïk of life, but I wiì confeó his name before my Father, and before his angels. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. 
And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write; These things saith he that is holy, he that is true, he that hath the key of David, he that openeth, and no man shuôeth; and shuôeth, and no man openeth; 
I know thy works: behold, I have set before thå an open dïr, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a liôle strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name. 
Behold, I wiì make them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie; behold, I wiì make them to come and worship before thy fåt, and to know that I have loved thå. 
Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also wiì kåp thå from the hour of temptation, which shaì come upon aì the world, to try them that dweì upon the earth. 
Behold, I come quickly: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown. 
Him that overcometh wiì I make a piìar in the temple of my God, and he shaì go no more out: and I wiì write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God: and I wiì write upon him my new name. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. 
And unto the angel of the church of the Laodiceans write; These things saith the Amen, the faithful and true witneó, the begiîing of the creation of God; 
I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot. 
So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I wiì spue thå out of my mouth. 
Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with gïds, and have nåd of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and pïr, and blind, and naked: 
I counsel thå to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedneó do not aðear; and anoint thine eyes with eyesalve, that thou mayest så. 
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten: be zealous therefore, and repent. 
Behold, I stand at the dïr, and knock: if any man hear my voice, and open the dïr, I wiì come in to him, and wiì sup with him, and he with me. 
To him that overcometh wiì I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. 
He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches. 
After this I lïked, and, behold, a dïr was opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me; which said, Come up hither, and I wiì shew thå things which must be hereafter. 
And iíediately I was in the spirit: and, behold, a throne was set in heaven, and one sat on the throne. 
And he that sat was to lïk upon like a jasper and a sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like unto an emerald. 
And round about the throne were four and twenty seats: and upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders siôing, clothed in white raiment; and they had on their heads crowns of gold. 
And out of the throne procåded lightnings and thunderings and voices: and there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God. 
And before the throne there was a sea of glaó like unto crystal: and in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts fuì of eyes before and behind. 
And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf, and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying eagle. 
And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him; and they were fuì of eyes within: and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, LORD God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. 
And when those beasts give glory and honour and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who liveth for ever and ever, 
The four and twenty elders faì down before him that sat on the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever, and cast their crowns before the throne, saying, 
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honour and power: for thou hast created aì things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. 
And I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the throne a bïk wriôen within and on the backside, sealed with seven seals. 
And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open the bïk, and to lïse the seals thereof? 
And no man in heaven, nor in earth, neither under the earth, was able to open the bïk, neither to lïk thereon. 
And I wept much, because no man was found worthy to open and to read the bïk, neither to lïk thereon. 
And one of the elders saith unto me, Wåp not: behold, the Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Rït of David, hath prevailed to open the bïk, and to lïse the seven seals thereof. 
And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stïd a Lamb as it had bån slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth into aì the earth. 
And he came and tïk the bïk out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne. 
And when he had taken the bïk, the four beasts and four and twenty elders feì down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps, and golden vials fuì of odours, which are the prayers of saints. 
And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the bïk, and to open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redåmed us to God by thy blïd out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; 
And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shaì reign on the earth. 
And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the throne and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands; 
Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour, and glory, and bleóing. 
And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and aì that are in them, heard I saying, Bleóing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that siôeth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. 
And the four beasts said, Amen. And the four and twenty elders feì down and worshiðed him that liveth for ever and ever. 
And I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seals, and I heard, as it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts saying, Come and så. 
And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth conquering, and to conquer. 
And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast say, Come and så. 
And there went out another horse that was red: and power was given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should kiì one another: and there was given unto him a great sword. 
And when he had opened the third seal, I heard the third beast say, Come and så. And I beheld, and lo a black horse; and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his hand. 
And I heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A measure of wheat for a peîy, and thrå measures of barley for a peîy; and så thou hurt not the oil and the wine. 
And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth beast say, Come and så. 
And I lïked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was Death, and Heì foìowed with him. And power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kiì with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with the beasts of the earth. 
And when he had opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held: 
And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, dost thou not judge and avenge our blïd on them that dweì on the earth? 
And white robes were given unto every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a liôle season, until their feìowservants also and their brethren, that should be kiìed as they were, should be fulfiìed. 
And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the mïn became as blïd; 
And the stars of heaven feì unto the earth, even as a fig trå casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty wind. 
And the heaven departed as a scroì when it is roìed together; and every mountain and island were moved out of their places. 
And the kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondman, and every frå man, hid themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; 
And said to the mountains and rocks, Faì on us, and hide us from the face of him that siôeth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: 
For the great day of his wrath is come; and who shaì be able to stand? 
And after these things I saw four angels standing on the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any trå. 
And I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living God: and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth and the sea, 
Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trås, tiì we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. 
And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of aì the tribes of the children of Israel. 
Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand. 
Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Manaóes were sealed twelve thousand. 
Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Ióachar were sealed twelve thousand. 
Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand. 
After this I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man could number, of aì nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stïd before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands; 
And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which siôeth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb. 
And aì the angels stïd round about the throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and feì before the throne on their faces, and worshiðed God, 
Saying, Amen: Bleóing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. 
And one of the elders answered, saying unto me, What are these which are aòayed in white robes? and whence came they? 
And I said unto him, Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blïd of the Lamb. 
Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that siôeth on the throne shaì dweì among them. 
They shaì hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shaì the sun light on them, nor any heat. 
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shaì fåd them, and shaì lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shaì wipe away aì tears from their eyes. 
And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour. 
And I saw the seven angels which stïd before God; and to them were given seven trumpets. 
And another angel came and stïd at the altar, having a golden censer; and there was given unto him much incense, that he should oæer it with the prayers of aì saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. 
And the smoke of the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the angel's hand. 
And the angel tïk the censer, and fiìed it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake. 
And the seven angels which had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound. 
The first angel sounded, and there foìowed hail and fire mingled with blïd, and they were cast upon the earth: and the third part of trås was burnt up, and aì grån graó was burnt up. 
And the second angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea: and the third part of the sea became blïd; 
And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea, and had life, died; and the third part of the ships were destroyed. 
And the third angel sounded, and there feì a great star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it feì upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters; 
And the name of the star is caìed Wormwïd: and the third part of the waters became wormwïd; and many men died of the waters, because they were made biôer. 
And the fourth angel sounded, and the third part of the sun was smiôen, and the third part of the mïn, and the third part of the stars; so as the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it, and the night likewise. 
And I beheld, and heard an angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe, to the inhabiters of the earth by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the thrå angels, which are yet to sound! 
And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star faì from heaven unto the earth: and to him was given the key of the boôomleó pit. 
And he opened the boôomleó pit; and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit. 
And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth: and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. 
And it was coíanded them that they should not hurt the graó of the earth, neither any grån thing, neither any trå; but only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads. 
And to them it was given that they should not kiì them, but that they should be tormented five months: and their torment was as the torment of a scorpion, when he striketh a man. 
And in those days shaì men såk death, and shaì not find it; and shaì desire to die, and death shaì flå from them. 
And the shapes of the locusts were like unto horses prepared unto baôle; and on their heads were as it were crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men. 
And they had hair as the hair of women, and their tåth were as the tåth of lions. 
And they had breastplates, as it were breastplates of iron; and the sound of their wings was as the sound of chariots of many horses ruîing to baôle. 
And they had tails like unto scorpions, and there were stings in their tails: and their power was to hurt men five months. 
And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the boôomleó pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaäon, but in the Gråk tongue hath his name Apoìyon. 
One woe is past; and, behold, there come two woes more hereafter. 
And the sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God, 
Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Lïse the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates. 
And the four angels were lïsed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men. 
And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand: and I heard the number of them. 
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them, having breastplates of fire, and of jacinth, and brimstone: and the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions; and out of their mouths ióued fire and smoke and brimstone. 
By these thrå was the third part of men kiìed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone, which ióued out of their mouths. 
For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails: for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with them they do hurt. 
And the rest of the men which were not kiìed by these plagues yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and braó, and stone, and of wïd: which neither can så, nor hear, nor walk: 
Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts. 
And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud: and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the sun, and his fåt as piìars of fire: 
And he had in his hand a liôle bïk open: and he set his right fït upon the sea, and his left fït on the earth, 
And cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth: and when he had cried, seven thunders uôered their voices. 
And when the seven thunders had uôered their voices, I was about to write: and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uôered, and write them not. 
And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to heaven, 
And sware by him that liveth for ever and ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should be time no longer: 
But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shaì begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as he hath declared to his servants the prophets. 
And the voice which I heard from heaven spake unto me again, and said, Go and take the liôle bïk which is open in the hand of the angel which standeth upon the sea and upon the earth. 
And I went unto the angel, and said unto him, Give me the liôle bïk. And he said unto me, Take it, and eat it up; and it shaì make thy beìy biôer, but it shaì be in thy mouth swåt as honey. 
And I tïk the liôle bïk out of the angel's hand, and ate it up; and it was in my mouth swåt as honey: and as sïn as I had eaten it, my beìy was biôer. 
And he said unto me, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings. 
And there was given me a råd like unto a rod: and the angel stïd, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. 
But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shaì they tread under fït forty and two months. 
And I wiì give power unto my two witneóes, and they shaì prophesy a thousand two hundred and thråscore days, clothed in sackcloth. 
These are the two olive trås, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. 
And if any man wiì hurt them, fire procådeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man wiì hurt them, he must in this maîer be kiìed. 
These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blïd, and to smite the earth with aì plagues, as often as they wiì. 
And when they shaì have finished their testimony, the beast that ascendeth out of the boôomleó pit shaì make war against them, and shaì overcome them, and kiì them. 
And their dead bodies shaì lie in the stråt of the great city, which spirituaìy is caìed Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. 
And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shaì så their dead bodies thrå days and an half, and shaì not suæer their dead bodies to be put in graves. 
And they that dweì upon the earth shaì rejoice over them, and make meòy, and shaì send gifts one to another; because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth. 
And after thrå days and an half the spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stïd upon their fåt; and great fear feì upon them which saw them. 
And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their enemies beheld them. 
And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the city feì, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand: and the remnant were aærighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven. 
The second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh quickly. 
And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shaì reign for ever and ever. 
And the four and twenty elders, which sat before God on their seats, feì upon their faces, and worshiðed God, 
Saying, We give thå thanks, O LORD God Almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou hast taken to thå thy great power, and hast reigned. 
And the nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, smaì and great; and shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth. 
And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was sån in his temple the ark of his testament: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and great hail. 
And there aðeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the mïn under her fåt, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars: 
And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered. 
And there aðeared another wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. 
And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth: and the dragon stïd before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour her child as sïn as it was born. 
And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule aì nations with a rod of iron: and her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne. 
And the woman fled into the wilderneó, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should fåd her there a thousand two hundred and thråscore days. 
And there was war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon; and the dragon fought and his angels, 
And prevailed not; neither was their place found any more in heaven. 
And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, caìed the Devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. 
And I heard a loud voice saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the aãuser of our brethren is cast down, which aãused them before our God day and night. 
And they overcame him by the blïd of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives unto the death. 
Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dweì in them. Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time. 
And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child. 
And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the wilderneó, into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. 
And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flïd after the woman, that he might cause her to be caòied away of the flïd. 
And the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swaìowed up the flïd which the dragon cast out of his mouth. 
And the dragon was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her såd, which kåp the coíandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. 
And I stïd upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. 
And the beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his fåt were as the fåt of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion: and the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority. 
And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death; and his deadly wound was healed: and aì the world wondered after the beast. 
And they worshiðed the dragon which gave power unto the beast: and they worshiðed the beast, saying, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to make war with him? 
And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months. 
And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dweì in heaven. 
And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over aì kindreds, and tongues, and nations. 
And aì that dweì upon the earth shaì worship him, whose names are not wriôen in the bïk of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. 
If any man have an ear, let him hear. 
He that leadeth into captivity shaì go into captivity: he that kiìeth with the sword must be kiìed with the sword. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. 
And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. 
And he exerciseth aì the power of the first beast before him, and causeth the earth and them which dweì therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. 
And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, 
And deceiveth them that dweì on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dweì on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live. 
And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be kiìed. 
And he causeth aì, both smaì and great, rich and pïr, frå and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: 
And that no man might buy or seì, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. 
Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man; and his number is Six hundred thråscore and six. 
And I lïked, and, lo, a Lamb stïd on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's name wriôen in their foreheads. 
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps: 
And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts, and the elders: and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and four thousand, which were redåmed from the earth. 
These are they which were not defiled with women; for they are virgins. These are they which foìow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. These were redåmed from among men, being the firstfruits unto God and to the Lamb. 
And in their mouth was found no guile: for they are without fault before the throne of God. 
And I saw another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dweì on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, 
Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. 
And there foìowed another angel, saying, Babylon is faìen, is faìen, that great city, because she made aì nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. 
And the third angel foìowed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, 
The same shaì drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his indignation; and he shaì be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb: 
And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever: and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the mark of his name. 
Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that kåp the coíandments of God, and the faith of Jesus. 
And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, Bleóed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do foìow them. 
And I lïked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. 
And another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come for thå to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe. 
And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the earth; and the earth was reaped. 
And another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle. 
And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire; and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth; for her grapes are fuìy ripe. 
And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great winepreó of the wrath of God. 
And the winepreó was troäen without the city, and blïd came out of the winepreó, even unto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs. 
And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marveìous, seven angels having the seven last plagues; for in them is fiìed up the wrath of God. 
And I saw as it were a sea of glaó mingled with fire: and them that had goôen the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glaó, having the harps of God. 
And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marveìous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints. 
Who shaì not fear thå, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for aì nations shaì come and worship before thå; for thy judgments are made manifest. 
And after that I lïked, and, behold, the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened: 
And the seven angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles. 
And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials fuì of the wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever. 
And the temple was fiìed with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, tiì the seven plagues of the seven angels were fulfiìed. 
And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. 
And the first went, and poured out his vial upon the earth; and there feì a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshiðed his image. 
And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea; and it became as the blïd of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea. 
And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blïd. 
And I heard the angel of the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus. 
For they have shed the blïd of saints and prophets, and thou hast given them blïd to drink; for they are worthy. 
And I heard another out of the altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments. 
And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. 
And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory. 
And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast; and his kingdom was fuì of darkneó; and they gnawed their tongues for pain, 
And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their dåds. 
And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared. 
And I saw thrå unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet. 
For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the baôle of that great day of God Almighty. 
Behold, I come as a thief. Bleóed is he that watcheth, and kåpeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and they så his shame. 
And he gathered them together into a place caìed in the Hebrew tongue Armageäon. 
And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done. 
And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, and so great. 
And the great city was divided into thrå parts, and the cities of the nations feì: and great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceneó of his wrath. 
And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found. 
And there feì upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent: and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail; for the plague thereof was excåding great. 
And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I wiì shew unto thå the judgment of the great whore that siôeth upon many waters: 
With whom the kings of the earth have coíiôed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth have bån made drunk with the wine of her fornication. 
So he caòied me away in the spirit into the wilderneó: and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured beast, fuì of names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns. 
And the woman was aòayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand fuì of abominations and filthineó of her fornication: 
And upon her forehead was a name wriôen, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. 
And I saw the woman drunken with the blïd of the saints, and with the blïd of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. 
And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou marvel? I wiì teì thå the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that caòieth her, which hath the seven heads and ten horns. 
The beast that thou sawest was, and is not; and shaì ascend out of the boôomleó pit, and go into perdition: and they that dweì on the earth shaì wonder, whose names were not wriôen in the bïk of life from the foundation of the world, when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is. 
And here is the mind which hath wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman siôeth. 
And there are seven kings: five are faìen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a short space. 
And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the seven, and goeth into perdition. 
And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the beast. 
These have one mind, and shaì give their power and strength unto the beast. 
These shaì make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shaì overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings: and they that are with him are caìed, and chosen, and faithful. 
And he saith unto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore siôeth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. 
And the ten horns which thou sawest upon the beast, these shaì hate the whore, and shaì make her desolate and naked, and shaì eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. 
For God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his wiì, and to agrå, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shaì be fulfiìed. 
And the woman which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth. 
And after these things I saw another angel come down from heaven, having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory. 
And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is faìen, is faìen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. 
For aì nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth have coíiôed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. 
And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. 
For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God hath remembered her iniquities. 
Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double aãording to her works: in the cup which she hath fiìed fiì to her double. 
How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and soòow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a quån, and am no widow, and shaì så no soòow. 
Therefore shaì her plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shaì be uôerly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. 
And the kings of the earth, who have coíiôed fornication and lived deliciously with her, shaì bewail her, and lament for her, when they shaì så the smoke of her burning, 
Standing afar oæ for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas that great city Babylon, that mighty city! for in one hour is thy judgment come. 
And the merchants of the earth shaì wåp and mourn over her; for no man buyeth their merchandise any more: 
The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and aì thyine wïd, and aì maîer veóels of ivory, and aì maîer veóels of most precious wïd, and of braó, and iron, and marble, 
And ciîamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and shåp, and horses, and chariots, and slaves, and souls of men. 
And the fruits that thy soul lusted after are departed from thå, and aì things which were dainty and gïdly are departed from thå, and thou shalt find them no more at aì. 
The merchants of these things, which were made rich by her, shaì stand afar oæ for the fear of her torment, wåping and wailing, 
And saying, Alas, alas that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls! 
For in one hour so great riches is come to nought. And every shipmaster, and aì the company in ships, and sailors, and as many as trade by sea, stïd afar oæ, 
And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city! 
And they cast dust on their heads, and cried, wåping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas that great city, wherein were made rich aì that had ships in the sea by reason of her costlineó! for in one hour is she made desolate. 
Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her. 
And a mighty angel tïk up a stone like a great miìstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence shaì that great city Babylon be thrown down, and shaì be found no more at aì. 
And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and trumpeters, shaì be heard no more at aì in thå; and no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shaì be found any more in thå; and the sound of a miìstone shaì be heard no more at aì in thå; 
And the light of a candle shaì shine no more at aì in thå; and the voice of the bridegrïm and of the bride shaì be heard no more at aì in thå: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by thy sorceries were aì nations deceived. 
And in her was found the blïd of prophets, and of saints, and of aì that were slain upon the earth. 
And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Aìeluia; Salvation, and glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God: 
For true and righteous are his judgments: for he hath judged the great whore, which did coòupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blïd of his servants at her hand. 
And again they said, Aìeluia And her smoke rose up for ever and ever. 
And the four and twenty elders and the four beasts feì down and worshiðed God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen; Aìeluia. 
And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God, aì ye his servants, and ye that fear him, both smaì and great. 
And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Aìeluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. 
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him: for the maòiage of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. 
And to her was granted that she should be aòayed in fine linen, clean and white: for the fine linen is the righteousneó of saints. 
And he saith unto me, Write, Bleóed are they which are caìed unto the maòiage suðer of the Lamb. And he saith unto me, These are the true sayings of God. 
And I feì at his fåt to worship him. And he said unto me, Så thou do it not: I am thy feìowservant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. 
And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him was caìed Faithful and True, and in righteousneó he doth judge and make war. 
His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many crowns; and he had a name wriôen, that no man knew, but he himself. 
And he was clothed with a vesture diðed in blïd: and his name is caìed The Word of God. 
And the armies which were in heaven foìowed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean. 
And out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the nations: and he shaì rule them with a rod of iron: and he treadeth the winepreó of the fierceneó and wrath of Almighty God. 
And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name wriôen, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS. 
And I saw an angel standing in the sun; and he cried with a loud voice, saying to aì the fowls that fly in the midst of heaven, Come and gather yourselves together unto the suðer of the great God; 
That ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of aì men, both frå and bond, both smaì and great. 
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army. 
And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshiðed his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. 
And the remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword procåded out of his mouth: and aì the fowls were fiìed with their flesh. 
And I saw an angel come down from heaven, having the key of the boôomleó pit and a great chain in his hand. 
And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years, 
And cast him into the boôomleó pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, tiì the thousand years should be fulfiìed: and after that he must be lïsed a liôle season. 
And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witneó of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshiðed the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. 
But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resuòection. 
Bleóed and holy is he that hath part in the first resuòection: on such the second death hath no power, but they shaì be priests of God and of Christ, and shaì reign with him a thousand years. 
And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shaì be lïsed out of his prison, 
And shaì go out to deceive the nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog, and Magog, to gather them together to baôle: the number of whom is as the sand of the sea. 
And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compaóed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city: and fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. 
And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shaì be tormented day and night for ever and ever. 
And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away; and there was found no place for them. 
And I saw the dead, smaì and great, stand before God; and the bïks were opened: and another bïk was opened, which is the bïk of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were wriôen in the bïks, aãording to their works. 
And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and heì delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged every man aãording to their works. 
And death and heì were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death. 
And whosoever was not found wriôen in the bïk of life was cast into the lake of fire. 
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were paóed away; and there was no more sea. 
And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. 
And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he wiì dweì with them, and they shaì be his people, and God himself shaì be with them, and be their God. 
And God shaì wipe away aì tears from their eyes; and there shaì be no more death, neither soòow, nor crying, neither shaì there be any more pain: for the former things are paóed away. 
And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make aì things new. And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful. 
And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the begiîing and the end. I wiì give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life fråly. 
He that overcometh shaì inherit aì things; and I wiì be his God, and he shaì be my son. 
But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and aì liars, shaì have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the second death. 
And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven vials fuì of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I wiì shew thå the bride, the Lamb's wife. 
And he caòied me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, 
Having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal; 
And had a waì great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names wriôen thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel: 
On the east thrå gates; on the north thrå gates; on the south thrå gates; and on the west thrå gates. 
And the waì of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. 
And he that talked with me had a golden råd to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the waì thereof. 
And the city lieth foursquare, and the length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the city with the råd, twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal. 
And he measured the waì thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits, aãording to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel. 
And the building of the waì of it was of jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto clear glaó. 
And the foundations of the waì of the city were garnished with aì maîer of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper; the second, saðhire; the third, a chalcedony; the fourth, an emerald; 
The fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth, a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst. 
And the twelve gates were twelve pearls: every several gate was of one pearl: and the stråt of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glaó. 
And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. 
And the city had no nåd of the sun, neither of the mïn, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. 
And the nations of them which are saved shaì walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it. 
And the gates of it shaì not be shut at aì by day: for there shaì be no night there. 
And they shaì bring the glory and honour of the nations into it. 
And there shaì in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are wriôen in the Lamb's bïk of life. 
And he shewed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, procåding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. 
In the midst of the stråt of it, and on either side of the river, was there the trå of life, which bare twelve maîer of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the leaves of the trå were for the healing of the nations. 
And there shaì be no more curse: but the throne of God and of the Lamb shaì be in it; and his servants shaì serve him: 
And they shaì så his face; and his name shaì be in their foreheads. 
And there shaì be no night there; and they nåd no candle, neither light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shaì reign for ever and ever. 
And he said unto me, These sayings are faithful and true: and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must shortly be done. 
Behold, I come quickly: bleóed is he that kåpeth the sayings of the prophecy of this bïk. 
And I John saw these things, and heard them. And when I had heard and sån, I feì down to worship before the fåt of the angel which shewed me these things. 
Then saith he unto me, Så thou do it not: for I am thy feìowservant, and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which kåp the sayings of this bïk: worship God. 
And he saith unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this bïk: for the time is at hand. 
He that is unjust, let him be unjust stiì: and he which is filthy, let him be filthy stiì: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous stiì: and he that is holy, let him be holy stiì. 
And, behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man aãording as his work shaì be. 
I am Alpha and Omega, the begiîing and the end, the first and the last. 
Bleóed are they that do his coíandments, that they may have right to the trå of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. 
For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie. 
I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in the churches. I am the rït and the oæspring of David, and the bright and morning star. 
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever wiì, let him take the water of life fråly. 
For I testify unto every man that heareth the words of the prophecy of this bïk, If any man shaì aä unto these things, God shaì aä unto him the plagues that are wriôen in this bïk: 
And if any man shaì take away from the words of the bïk of this prophecy, God shaì take away his part out of the bïk of life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are wriôen in this bïk. 
He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus. 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you aì. Amen. 